Title: Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.03334v1

Published Time: Wed, 06 May 2026 00:35:36 GMT

Number of Pages: 37

Markdown Content:
# Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons ∗

# Sujoy Bhore #

Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Bombay, India 

# Chih-Hung Liu #

Department of Electrical Engineering, National Taiwan University, Taiwan 

# Anurag Murty Naredla #

Department of Computer Science, University of Manitoba, Canada 

# Yakov Nekrich #

Michigan Technological University, USA 

# Eunjin Oh #

POSTECH, Korea 

# André van Renssen #

The University of Sydney, Australia 

# Frank Staals #

Department of Information and Computing Sciences, Utrecht University, The Netherlands 

# Haitao Wang #

Kahlert School of Computing, University of Utah, USA 

# Jie Xue #

New York University Shanghai, China 

Abstract 

Given a simple polygon P with n vertices, we consider the problem of constructing a data structure for visibility queries: for any query point q ∈ P , compute the visibility polygon of q in P . To obtain 

O(log n + k) query time, where k is the size of the visibility polygon of q, the previous best result requires O(n3) space. In this paper, we propose a new data structure that uses O(n2+ ϵ) space, for any ϵ > 0, while achieving the same query time. If only O(n2) space is available, the best known result provides O( log 2 n + k) query time. We improve this to O(log n log log n + k) time. When restricted to o(n2) space, the only previously known approach, aside from the O(n)-time algorithm that computes the visibility polygon without preprocessing, is an O(n)-space data structure that supports O(k log n)-time queries. We construct a data structure using O(n log n) space that answers visibility queries in O(n1/2+ ϵ + k) time. In addition, for the special case in which q lies on the boundary of P , we build a data structure of O(n log n) space supporting O(log 2 n + k) query time; alternatively, we achieve O(log n + k) query time using O(n1+ ϵ) space. To achieve our results, we propose a new method for decomposing simple polygons, which may be of independent interest. 

2012 ACM Subject Classification Theory of computation → Computational Geometry; Theory of computation → Design and analysis of algorithms 

Keywords and phrases simple polygons, visibility polygons, visibility queries, polygon decompositions 

Funding Sujoy Bhore : Work supported in part by ANRF ARG-MATRICS, Grant 002465. 

Chih-Hung Liu : Supported by Ministry of Education, Taiwan under Yushan Fellow Program with the grant number MOE-111-YSFEE-0003-006-P1. 

Yakov Nekrich : Supported by the National Science Foundation under NSF grant 2203278. 

Eunjin Oh : Supported by Institute of Information & Communications Technology Planning & Evaluation (IITP) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.RS-2024-00440239, Sublinear  

> ∗

A preliminary version of this paper will appear in Proceedings of the 53rd International Colloquium on Automata, Languages, and Programming (ICALP 2026) .

> arXiv:2605.03334v1 [cs.CG] 5 May 2026

2 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons q       

> Figure 1 The grey region is Vis (q). Each edge of it is either a portion of an edge of Por a dotted segment (which is called a window in the literature [3]). Scalable Algorithms for Large-Scale Data Analysis) and the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) grant funded by the Korea government (MSIT) (No.RS-2024-00358505).
> André van Renssen : This research was partially funded by the Australian Government through the Australian Research Council (project number DP240101353).
> Acknowledgements This work originated at Shonan Meeting No. 234, “Path Planning and Routing in Geometric Environments.” We thank the participants for their valuable discussions, and we are also grateful to the organizers and the National Institute of Informatics for hosting the event.

# 1 Introduction 

Let P be a simple polygon with n vertices. A point p ∈ P is said to be visible to a point 

q ∈ P if the line segment pq lies entirely inside P . The visibility polygon Vis (q) of q is the set of all points in P that are visible to q; see Figure 1. It is well known that Vis (q) is a star-shaped polygon whose vertices are either: (i) vertices of P , or (ii) intersection points between edges of P and rays from q passing through reflex vertices of P .In this paper, we study data structures for visibility queries : given a query point q ∈ P ,compute the visibility polygon Vis (q) efficiently. 

Previous work. Vis (q) can be computed in O(n) time without any preprocessing [10, 16, 18]. If O( log n)-time ray-shooting queries are available, then Vis (q) can be computed in O(k log n)

time [2], where k is the size of Vis (q). Such ray-shooting data structures can be constructed in O(n) time [9, 10, 20]. Ideally, one would like a query algorithm whose running time is linear in the output size, i.e., O(k). Data structures achieving this are known, but at the cost of larger space. Bose, Lubiw, and Munro [3], and independently Guibas, Motwani, and Raghavan [19], obtained O( log n + k) query time using O(n3) space and O(n3 log n)

preprocessing time. Aronov, Guibas, Teichmann, and Zhang [2] constructed a data structure of O(n2) space in O(n2 log n) time that supports O(log 2 n + k)-time visibility queries. Note that O(log n + k) is the optimal query time [3, 19]. 

Our results. There has been no progress on this problem for almost three decades since the conference version of [2] was published in 1998. In this paper, we present the following new results. First, we give the first-known subquadratic-space structure that achieves a query time linear in the output size: a data structure of O(n log n) space, O(n log 2 n) preprocessing time, and O(n1/2+ ϵ + k) query time. Throughout the paper, ϵ represents an arbitrarily small positive constant. Furthermore, we obtain the following trade-offs between the query time and preprocessing: for a parameter r satisfying 1 ≤ r ≤ n1−ϵ, we can build a Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 3

data structure of space O(nr + n log (n/r )) , O(( nr + n log (n/r )) log n) preprocessing time, and O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ + k) query time. Note that this result implies that for a large k (e.g., 

k = Ω( nϵ)), we can achieve O(k) query time with sub-quadratic preprocessing. Second, to achieve the optimal O( log n + k) query time, we construct a data structure of 

O(n2+ ϵ) space and preprocessing time, for any ϵ > 0. This improves the space bound of the previous O(n3)-space structures [3, 19] by nearly a linear factor. Third, under an O(n2) space budget, we improve the O( log 2 n + k) query time in [2] to 

O(log n log log n + k), with a preprocessing time of O(n2 log n).We remark that even a near-logarithmic improvement in query time is often considered significant. Indeed, for the closely related ray-shooting problem, reducing the query time from O(log 2 n) to O(log n) required substantial technical effort [9, 10, 20]. Table 1 summarizes these bounds alongside prior work.                                                    

> Table 1 Summary of the results for visibility queries ( kis the output size). Results Query time Space Preprocessing time [9, 20] O(klog n)O(n)O(n)
> [3, 19] O(log n+k)O(n3)O(n3log n)
> [2] O(log 2n+k)O(n2)O(n2log n)
> Ours (near-linear space) O(n1/2+ ϵ+k)O(nlog n)O(nlog 2n)
> Ours (optimal query time) O(log n+k)O(n2+ ϵ)O(n2+ ϵ)
> Ours (quadratic space) O(log nlog log n+k)O(n2)O(n2log n)

In addition, we study a natural special case in which the query point q lies on the boundary of P . To the best of our knowledge, this boundary case has not been treated separately in the literature. We obtain a data structure of O(n log n) space and O(n log 2 n) preprocessing time that answers queries in O( log 2 n + k) time. Alternatively, we can achieve O(log n + k)

query time using O(n1+ ϵ) space and preprocessing time. 

Other related work. Several related visibility query problems have also been studied. Chen and Daescu [11] considered a segment-restricted version, where the query point q lies on a given segment in P . Their data structure uses O(n) space and supports queries in O( log n+k)

time. However, their approach does not appear to extend to arbitrary query points. Given a segment s ⊆ P , a point is weakly visible to s if it is visible to at least one point of 

s. The weak visibility polygon of s consists of all points of P visible to s, and can be computed in O(n) time [18]. The corresponding weak visibility query problem, i.e., computing this polygon for an arbitrary query segment, has been investigated in several works [2 – 4,13]. Using 

O(n) space and preprocessing time, one can support queries in O(k log n) time; alternatively, using O(n3) space and preprocessing time, queries can be answered in O( log n + k) time [13]. As a special visibility problem, the ray-shooting problem asks for the first point on ∂P 

hit by a ray originating inside P . As mentioned earlier, ray-shooting queries can be answered in O(log n) time after O(n)-time preprocessing [9, 20]. Visibility and ray-shooting in polygons with holes have also been studied [1,12,21,23,25,27], but the presence of holes makes the problems substantially more difficult. We refer the reader to [12] for an overview of results in that setting. 4 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

# 1.1 An overview of our approach 

The methods of [3, 19] decompose P into O(n3) cells such that the combinatorial structure of Vis (q) is the same for every point q in the same cell. Since the decomposition itself has cubic size, these approaches cannot be directly adapted when one wishes to use subcubic space. The approach [2] instead builds on the balanced decomposition of P [10, 17, 18] (see Section 2 for more details). Their method achieves O( log 2 n + k) query time using O(n2)

space. The O( log 2 n) factor in query time appears inherent to the balanced decomposition: each subpolygon may be connected to the “outside world”, i.e., the rest of P , by O( log n)

diagonals and the decomposition has O(log n) recursive levels. To obtain O( log n+k) query time with subcubic space, we therefore require a new strategy. Our main idea is to introduce a new polygon decomposition with a crucial structural feature (which we call the gate property ): every subpolygon connects to the outside world through a single diagonal, which we call its gate . As in the balanced decomposition, we recursively divide P into subpolygons whose sizes shrink geometrically; however, the gate property fundamentally changes how visibility information propagates across subregions. Note that such a gate property alone might be achieved through other decompositions. However, a key advantage of our decomposition is that it enables efficient preprocessing, allowing certain types of visibility queries to be answered efficiently (see Theorem 9). Intuitively, suppose a query point q lies in a subpolygon Pd with gate d. If we have already computed the portion of Pd visible to q, denoted by Vis (Pd, q ), then the remaining part of the visibility region, Vis (P \ Pd, q ), is exactly the portion of P \ Pd visible through the diagonal d. We refer to computing this region as the diagonal-separated subproblem . The entire query algorithm reduces to solving this subproblem and recursing inside Pd (i.e., to compute Vis (Pd, q ), we can apply the algorithm recursively). Our optimal-query-time data structure is built on this decomposition and uses O(1) 

recursive steps by choosing a parameter r = nϵ. This yields O(n2+ ϵ) space and O( log n + k)

query time. Our quadratic-space data structure also relies on our new decomposition but groups its levels into O( log log n) super-levels . This reduces the space to O(n2) at the cost of increasing the query time to O(log n log log n + k). In contrast, the balanced decomposition of [2] has Θ(log n) levels, resulting in an unavoidable O(log 2 n) factor. Our near-linear space data structure follows the high-level strategy of [2] but solves the diagonal-separated subproblem more efficiently. While [2] used an O(n2)-space data structure supporting O( log n + k) queries for this subproblem, we instead reduce the problem to simplex stabbing queries and adapt the recent structure of Chan and Zhang [5]. This gives an O(n)-space structure supporting queries in O(n1/2+ ϵ + k) time, yielding our result. For the boundary case, the diagonal-separated subproblem simplifies substantially: with 

q constrained to lie on the boundary of P , the remaining computation becomes essentially one-dimensional. We obtain a solution of O(n) space and O( log n + k) query time. Plugging this into the balanced decomposition method of [2], we obtain our first data structure for the boundary case. Plugging this into our new decomposition yields our second data structure. It is worth noting that our new decomposition may be interesting in its own right, and we believe it will find additional applications in the future. 

Outline. In the following, after introducing notation in Section 2, we present our near-linear space data structure in Section 3. In Section 4, we describe our new polygon decomposition, which serves as a key component for the optimal-query-time data structure in Section 5 and the quadratic-space solution in Section 6. The boundary case is discussed in Section 7. Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 5

# 2 Preliminaries 

We follow the notation introduced in Section 1, e.g., P , n, and Vis (q). For any subpolygon 

P ′ ⊆ P , we define Vis (P ′, q ) = Vis (q) ∩ P ′, i.e., the portion of Vis (q) contained in P ′.For convenience, we assume that each edge of P is an open segment that does not include its endpoints; thus, the vertices of P are disjoint from its edges. We refer to either a vertex or an edge of P as an element of P . For any geometric object R, let ∂R denote its boundary. For two points p and q, pq denotes the line segment connecting them. It is well known that Vis (q) is star-shaped and can be represented by a cyclic (say, clockwise) list of its vertices. Alternatively, given the cyclic list of vertices and edges of P

that appear on the boundary ∂Vis (q), one can reconstruct Vis (q) in O(|Vis (q)|) time [2, 3]. Hence, to compute Vis (q), it suffices to determine this cyclic list, called the combinatorial representation of Vis (q) [2]. It is also known that this cyclic order of vertices and edges of 

P on ∂Vis (q) is consistent with their order along ∂P . In the following, depending on the context, we may use Vis (q) to refer to its combinatorial representation. 

Balanced decomposition. We will use the balanced decomposition of P , which has been applied to various problems in simple polygons [2, 10, 17, 18]. A diagonal is a line segment connecting two vertices of P that is fully contained in P but not an edge of P . Chazelle [6] proved that P always admits a diagonal that splits it into two subpolygons, each having between n/ 3 and 2n/ 3 vertices. The balanced decomposition of P is obtained by recursively partitioning each subpolygon using such diagonals until all subpolygons are triangles. This decomposition can be represented by a tree T (P ), called the BD-tree . Each node v of 

T (P ) corresponds to a subpolygon Pv of P : the root corresponds to P itself, and each leaf corresponds to a triangle. The diagonal used to partition Pv into its two child subpolygons is stored at v and denoted by dv . The triangles at all leaves of T (P ) form a triangulation of 

P . The entire decomposition and BD-tree T (P ) can be computed in O(n) time [7, 17]. 

Convention on stating query time. For simplicity, when we state that a data structure supports queries in O(Q(n)) time for computing Vis (q) (or a portion thereof, e.g., Vis (P ′, q )

for a subpolygon P ′ ⊆ P ), we mean that a (balanced) binary search tree storing the combinatorial representation of Vis (q) can be computed in O(Q(n)) time, and the full visibility polygon Vis (q) can then be output in an additional O(|Vis (q)|) time. For conciseness, we say that a data structure has complexity O(T (n), S (n), Q (n)) if its preprocessing time, space, and query time are O(T (n)) , O(S(n)) , and O(Q(n)) , respectively. 

# 3 A near-linear space data structure 

In this section, we present our near-linear space data structure. Our algorithm follows the general framework of [2], but we address a key component, the diagonal-separated subproblem, in a different way, as discussed in Section 1.1. This subproblem arises in essentially all of our subsequent data structures. The same framework will also be partially used in our quadratic-space data structure in Section 6 and in the boundary case solution in Section 7. Therefore, the discussions in this section are also instrumental to the later parts of the paper. We first discuss the diagonal-separated subproblem in Section 3.1, present its linear-space solution in Section 3.2, and finally describe the general algorithmic framework in Section 3.3. 6 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons qdPrP`s   

> Figure 2 The gray region is Vis (Pℓ, q ).Cs(q)is bounded by the two blue dotted segments.

qdPrPℓpp′ 

> Figure 3 The gray region is Vis d(q).

# 3.1 A diagonal-separated subproblem 

Let d be a diagonal that divides P into two subpolygons Pℓ and Pr . Without loss of generality, assume that d is vertical and Pℓ lies locally to the left of d. The diagonal-separated subproblem 

is to compute Vis (Pℓ, q ) for any query point q ∈ Pr . We describe our solution below. Since q ∈ Pr , for any point p ∈ Vis (Pℓ, q ), pq must cross d. In other words, the visibility of q within Pℓ occurs “through” d. Because P is a simple polygon, Vis (d, q ) is a contiguous segment of d [2]. Let s = Vis (d, q ). If s = ∅, then Vis (Pℓ, q ) = ∅. Otherwise, let Cq (s) denote the cone formed by the rays from q through all points p ∈ s; we say that Cq (s) is defined by 

q and s, and refer to q as the apex of the cone (see Figure 2). Using the two-point shortest path data structure of Guibas and Hershberger [17] (hence-forth referred to as the GH data structure ), the two bounding rays of Cq (s) can be computed in O( log n) time via shortest-path queries. To compute Vis (Pℓ, q ), it thus suffices to determine the portion of Pℓ visible to q through the cone Cq (s).We use Vis s(q) to denote Vis (Pℓ, q ). We also define an analogous notion Vis d(q), which consists of all points p ∈ Pℓ such that pq crosses d and pp ′ ⊆ Pℓ, where p′ = d ∩ pq . Note that whether the segment qp ′ lies inside P is irrelevant. See Figure 3. Following [2], we first compute a binary search tree that stores the combinatorial rep-resentation of Vis d(q), i.e., the cyclic order of the elements of Pℓ (recall that an element refers to either a vertex or an edge of P ) appearing on ∂Vis d(q). We then perform a clipping 

operation on this tree using Cq (s); the resulting tree represents Vis s(q).

▶ Observation 1. [2, 3] The order of the vertices and edges of Pℓ along ∂Vis s(q) (resp., 

∂Vis d(q)) is consistent with their order along ∂P ℓ.

We sort all elements of Pℓ along its boundary and assign each of them an index in this order. Let Ad(q) denote the set of elements of P that appear on ∂Vis d(q). By Observation 1, the elements of Ad(q) are sorted in index order in the combinatorial representation of Vis d(q).For each vertex v ∈ Pℓ, as discussed above, all points of d visible to v within Pℓ form a segment sv of d. Let Cv denote the cone defined by sv and v. Observe that v belongs to 

Ad(q) if and only if q ∈ Cv . For each edge e of Pℓ, as discussed in [18], the points of d weakly Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 7dP`eCe        

> Figure 4 The gray region is Ce.The two dashed red paths are shortest paths from the two endpoints of eto the two vertices of d. The two bounding lines of Ceare tangent to these two paths.

visible to e also form a segment se of d, such that e belongs to Ad(q) if and only if q lies in the cone Ce defined by se and a point to the left of d (see Figure 4). For reference, we summarize the above discussion in the following observation. 

▶ Observation 2. For each vertex v (resp., edge e) of Pℓ, v (resp., e) appears in the combinatorial representation of Vis d(q) if and only if q lies in the cone Cv (resp., Ce). 

All cones Cv and Ce for the vertices and edges of Pℓ can be computed in O(n) time using the shortest path trees of the two endpoints of d [18]. Let C denote the set of all these cones. We refer to v (resp., e) as the generator of Cv (resp., Ce). To compute Ad(q), by Observation 2, the problem reduces to the following cone stabbing query : given q, compute all cones of C that are stabbed by q (we say that a cone is stabbed by q if the cone contains 

q). To accommodate the clipping operation with Cq (s), we require the data structure to return a binary search tree storing the generators of the stabbed cones in their index order. 

A quadratic-space solution. A quadratic-space solution is given in [2]. We briefly review it below as it also serves as a subroutine in some of our later algorithms. Let Rd denote the halfplane to the right of the supporting line of d. If q / ∈ Rd, then Vis d(q) = ∅, so we assume q ∈ Rd. Let Ad be the arrangement in Rd formed by the supporting lines of the bounding rays of all cones in C. By Observation 2, points q in the same cell of 

Ad share the same (combinatorial representation of) Vis d(q), and Vis d(q) of q in adjacent cells differ by at most one element of Pℓ. Since there are O(n) cones, Ad has O(n2) cells. We use persistent binary search trees [14, 26] to store the combinatorial representations of Vis d(q) for all cells of Ad in a total of O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) preprocessing time. Additionally, we construct a point location data structure on Ad in O(n2) time and space [15, 22]. Given a query point q, we can locate the cell of Ad containing q in O(log n) time and thereby obtain access to the corresponding binary search tree that stores Vis d(q). This yields a data structure of complexity O(n2 log n, n 2, log n), i.e., O(n2 log n) preprocessing time, O(n2) space, and O(log n) query time for computing Vis (Pℓ, q ) for any q ∈ Pr .

The boundary case. In the boundary case, each query point q is on ∂P ∩ Pr . In this case the cone stabbing queries become 1D interval stabbing queries on ∂P ∩ Pr . Using persistent trees [14, 26], we obtain a data structure of complexity O(n log n, n, log n). This result combining with the algorithmic framework given in Section 3.3 yields a data structure of complexity O(n log 2 n, n log n, log 2 n) for computing Vis (q). See Section 7 for details. 8 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

# 3.2 A linear-space solution to the diagonal-separated subproblem 

We now present our solution to the cone stabbing problem and thus solve the diagonal-separated subproblem. 

Overview. Our algorithm computes a collection of “canonical subsets” of C, where each subset is represented by a binary search tree storing the cone generators in their index order. We perform a clipping operation on each tree using the cone Cs(q). The elements remaining in the clipped trees of all canonical subsets collectively form the set As(q), which consists of the elements of P lying on ∂Vis s(q). We then sort the elements of As(q) by their index order to obtain Vis s(q). Finally we build a binary search tree to store them and return this tree as the answer to the query. The details are given below. We adapt Chan and Zhang’s data structure [5, Section 3.1] for simplex stabbing queries (given a query point q, compute all simplices stabbed by q among a set of given simplices; each of our cones is a special simplex in 2D). The data structure has multiple levels and it is constructed using Matoušek’s simplicial partition [24]. To solve our problem, we can build the data structure on the cones of C with j = 2 levels. We briefly discuss this and the reader is referred to [5, Section 3.1] for details. Determining whether q is in a cone is equivalent to testing whether q is in the intersection of two halfplanes bounded by the cone’s bounding lines. In the dual plane, this is to check whether the dual line q∗ of q lies in the “correct” side of the two dual points of the bounding lines of the cone. We apply Matoušek’s simplicial partition [24] on the dual points of the j-th halfplanes of the cones of C, with j = 2 . For each cell ∆ of the partition that intersects q∗, we recurse on the canonical subset of the dual points of ∆. For each cell ∆ lying entirely below 

q∗ (or above q∗, depending on which is the correct side), we recurse on the canonical subset of ∆ but as a level-( j − 1) problem. For each canonical subset in a level-0 problem, we build a binary search tree to store all generators of cones in the subset. Following the analysis in [5, Section 3.1], the resulting data structure is of O(n) space and can be constructed in 

O(n log n) time. Given a query point q, the query algorithm returns O(n1/2+ ϵ) canonical subsets whose union corresponds to the set of cones of C stabbed by q. For each canonical subset, we perform a clipping operation using the cone Cq (s), taking O( log n) additional time. Hence, we can compute As(q) in O(n1/2+ ϵ log n + |As(q)|) time, which simplies to O(n1/2+ ϵ + |As(q)|)

since the log n factor is absorbed by nϵ.

Remark. Chan and Zhang also proposed a more efficient data structure that, in the two-dimensional case, answers simplex range stabbing counting queries in O(√n) time [5, Section 3]. However, that structure is designed for the group setting and relies on subtraction operations to compute the number of simplices stabbed by a query point. In our setting, where clipping operations are required, this subtraction-based approach is no longer applicable. Furthermore, Chan and Zhang [5, Section 3.5] also considered simplex range stabbing 

reporting queries and developed a data structure that, in the two-dimensional case, answers each reporting query in O(√n + k) time, where k denotes the output size. One might hope to adapt this structure to improve our cone stabbing queries, and specifically, to reduce the 

O(n1/2+ ϵ) factor to O(√n). However, since their reporting query bound also depends on the output size, the O(√n) term does not necessarily bound the number of canonical subsets. In our problem, where clipping operations are essential, we require a genuine upper bound Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 9

on the number of canonical subsets. Hence, adapting their reporting data structure to our setting appears challenging. Once As(q) is obtained, we must sort its elements by their index order. A straightfor-ward comparison sort would require O(|As(q)| log |As(q)|) time, introducing an undesired logarithmic factor in the overall query time. However, since the index of each element of 

As(q) is an integer in [1 , 2n], we can perform the sorting in O(nϵ + |As(q)|) time using radix sort in the following lemma. 

▶ Lemma 3. For any ϵ > 0, the elements of As(q) can be sorted by their indices in 

O(nϵ + |As(q)|) time. 

Proof. Let I denote the set of indices of the elements in As(q), and our goal is to sort the integers in I. Since each index in I is an integer in [1 , 2n], it can be represented using at most 

log n + 1 bits. We partition these log n + 1 bits into O(1) groups, each consisting of ϵ log n

bits. We refer to each such group as a digit . Hence, each integer in I has O(1) digits. We apply radix sort on the integers of I using these digits. Sorting I by a single digit requires 

O(2 ϵ log n + |I|) = O(nϵ + |I|) time. Since there are only O(1) digits, the entire sorting process takes O(1) passes, resulting in a total running time of O(nϵ + |I|). ◀

After As(q) is sorted, we obtain the combinatorial representation of Vis s(q). We then construct a binary search tree to store this representation in an additional O(|Vis s(q)|) time. Combining all the above results yields the following lemma. 

▶ Lemma 4. Given a simple polygon P of n vertices and a diagonal d dividing P into two subpolygons Pℓ and Pr , a data structure of O(n) space can be constructed in O(n log n) time such that Vis (Pℓ, q ) can be computed in O(n1/2+ ϵ + |Vis (Pℓ, q )|) time for any point q ∈ Pr .

# 3.3 A general algorithmic framework 

We now describe the algorithmic framework. In the preprocessing, we compute a balanced decomposition of P together with the BD-tree T (P ) as defined in Section 2. Given a query point q ∈ P , let vq be the leaf of T (P ) whose triangle Pvq contains q. The query algorithm proceeds in a bottom-up manner along the path from vq to the root of T (P ).For each node v on this path, let u denote the parent of v and w the sibling of v (i.e., the other child of u). Suppose that Vis (Pv , q ) has already been computed (this is true initially when v = vq since Vis (Pv , q ) = Pvq ). Our goal at node u is to compute Vis (Pu, q ), which equals the union of Vis (Pv , q ) and Vis (Pw, q ).By definition, Pu is partitioned into Pv and Pw by the diagonal du. Since Vis (Pv , q ) is known, we next compute Vis (Pw, q ) and then merge Vis (Pv , q ) and Vis (Pw, q ) along du to obtain Vis (Pu, q ). Computing Vis (Pw, q ) is precisely an instance of the diagonal-separated subproblem. Therefore, in the preprocessing, for each node u ∈ T (P ), we construct a diagonal-separated data structure for both Pv and Pw (with respect to du). During a query, these data structures allow us to compute Vis (Pw, q ) efficiently. Once Vis (Pw, q ) is computed, we obtain Vis (Pu, q ) by merging Vis (Pw, q ) and Vis (Pv , q )

along s = Vis (du, q ). Note that if s = ∅, then Vis (Pw, q ) = ∅; otherwise, s must be an edge of Vis (Pv , q ). Merging Vis (Pv , q ) and Vis (Pw, q ) can be done in O( log n) time. This merging step was briefly mentioned in [2]; for completeness and reference purpose, we provide some details in Lemma 5. After computing Vis (Pu, q ), the algorithm continues upward until reaching the root of T (P ), at which point Vis (q) is obtained. 10 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

▶ Lemma 5. Suppose a diagonal d divides P into two subpolygons Pℓ and Pr . Let q be a point in Pr . Given a binary search tree storing Vis (Pr , q ) and a binary search tree storing Vis (Pℓ, q ), we can obtain a binary search tree storing Vis (q) in O(log n) time. 

Proof. Let Tr be the tree storing Vis (Pr , q ) and Tℓ the tree storing Vis (Pℓ, q ). Let s =

Vis (d, q ). If s = ∅, then Vis (Pℓ, q ) = ∅ and thus Vis (q) = Vis (Pr , q ). In this case, we can simply return Tr . If s̸ = ∅, then d must appear as an element in Vis (Pr , q ). We assume that 

Tr stores Vis (Pr , q ) in such a way that each element of Vis (Pr , q ) is stored in a leaf of Tr .Let vd be the leaf of Tr storing d.The visibility of q in Pℓ is constrained by the cone Cq (s) defined by q and s, i.e., Vis (Pℓ, q ) ⊆ Cq (s). Therefore, if we replace the leaf vd in Tr by the entire tree Tℓ, then we could obtain a new tree that exactly stores the combinatorial representation of Vis (q).However, the new tree thus obtained might not be balanced. To achieve a balanced tree, we instead do the following. We first perform a split operation to split Tr into two trees along the path from the root to vd (and also remove vd). After that, we perform a splice operation to splice the above two trees with Tℓ by having Tℓ in the middle. These split and splice operations can be done in O( log n) time. The new tree thus obtained is balanced. We finally return the root of the new tree. The total time is O(log n). ◀

If we plug the quadratic-space diagonal-separated data structure of [2] (also reviewed in Section 3.1) into the framework, then, since the sizes of the subpolygons decrease geo-metrically along any root-to-leaf path of T (P ), we obtain a data structure of complexity 

O(n2 log n, n 2, log 2 n) for computing Vis (q) for any q ∈ P . This is the result of [2]. If we instead apply our linear-space result from Lemma 4, then, because the total size of all subpolygons at each level of T (P ) is O(n) (as they form a partition of P ), we obtain a data structure of complexity O(n log 2 n, n log n, n 1/2+ ϵ).

Trade-off. We can obtain a trade-off by applying a somewhat standard trade-off technique based on hierarchical cuttings [8]. Specifically, we first have the following trade-off of Lemma 4 for the diagonal-separated problem. 

▶ Lemma 6. Let P be a simple polygon with n vertices, and let d be a diagonal that divides 

P into two subpolygons Pℓ and Pr . Suppose r is a parameter satisfying 1 ≤ r ≤ n1−ϵ for any constant ϵ > 0. Then, a data structure of size O(nr ) can be constructed in O(nr log (n/r )) 

time such that Vis (Pℓ, q ) can be computed in O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ + |Vis (Pℓ, q )|) time for any query point q ∈ Pr .

Proof. We first introduce the hierarchical cutting [8] and then explain our approach. Let H be a set of n lines in the plane. For a parameter r with 1 ≤ r ≤ n, a (1 /r )-cutting 

Ξ for H is a collection of interior-disjoint triangles (called cells ) whose union covers the entire plane such that |Hσ | ≤ n/r , where Hσ is the subset of lines of H crossing the interior of σ

(Hσ is called the conflict list of σ). The size of Ξ is the number of cells of Ξ.A cutting Ξ′ c-refines another cutting Ξ if each cell of Ξ′ is contained in a cell of Ξ and each cell of Ξ contains at most c cells of Ξ′. A hierarchical (1 /r )-cutting for H consists of a sequence of cuttings Ξ0, Ξ1, ..., Ξt, in which Ξ0 has only one cell that is the entire plane, and each Ξi, 1 ≤ i ≤ t, is a (1 /ρ i)-cutting of size O(ρ2i) that c-refines Ξi−1, for two constants 

ρ and c. By setting t = ⌈log ρ r⌉, the last cutting Ξt is a (1 /r )-cutting. If a cell σ′ of Ξi−1

contains a cell σ of Ξi, we say that σ′ is the parent of σ and σ is a child of σ′. As such, the hierarchical (1 /r )-cutting forms a tree structure with the single cell of Ξ0 as the root. Let Ξ

denote the set of all cells in all cuttings Ξi, 0 ≤ i ≤ t. The total number of cells of Ξ is O(r2)Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 11 

and the sum of the conflict sizes of all cells of Ξ is O(nr ) [8]. A hierarchical (1 /r )-cutting for 

H can be computed in O(nr ) time, along with the conflict lists Hσ for all cells σ ∈ Ξ [8]. We next prove the lemma. Let H denote the set of the supporting lines of bounding rays of the cones of C.

Preprocessing. In the preprocessing, we construct a hierarchical (1 /r )-cutting for H as above, for some parameter 1 ≤ r ≤ n1−ϵ. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ t, for each cell σ ∈ Ξi, we compute C(σ), the set of cones of C that contain σ but do not contain the parent cell of σ.The set C(σ) can be computed as follows. Let σ′ be the parent of σ in Ξi−1. For each line in the conflict list Hσ′ , it is the supporting line of a bounding ray of a cone C; we add C

to C(σ) if C contains σ. Since σ′ has O(1) children, computing C(σ) for all children σ of 

σ′ takes O(|Hσ′ |) time. As such, computing C(σ) for all cells σ ∈ Ξ can be done in time linear in the sum of the conflict sizes of all cells of Ξ, which is O(nr ). This also implies that 

∑ 

> σ∈Ξ

|C (σ)| = O(nr ).For each cell σ ∈ Ξ, we further construct a binary search tree to store all cones of C(σ) by the index order of their generators. Since we already know the sorted order of the generators of all cones of C, the sorted lists for C(σ) for all cells σ ∈ Ξ can be obtained in O(nr ) time. As such, constructing the binary search trees for all cells of Ξ takes O(nr ) time in total. In addition, for each cell σ in the last cutting Ξt, let Cσ denote the set of the cones of C

whose bounding lines are in the conflict list Hσ . We construct a data structure of Lemma 4 on the cones of Cσ , which takes O(n/r ) space and O(n/r · log (n/r )) time since |C σ | = O(n/r ).Let Dσ denote the data structure. As Ξt has O(r2) cells, constructing the data structures 

Dσ for all cells σ ∈ Ξ takes O(nr ) space and O(nr log( n/r )) time. Finally, we construct the GH data structure for P in O(n) time and space [17]. This finishes the preprocessing, which takes O(nr ) space and O(nr log( n/r )) time in total. 

Queries. Given a query point q ∈ Pr , we compute s = Vis (d, q ) in O( log n) time by the GH data structure. Next, we will first compute As(q) and then sort As(q), after which Vis s(q) = Vis (Pℓ, q ) can be obtained. We compute As(q) as follows. Starting from the only cell of Ξ0, we follow the hierarchical cutting in a top-down manner. For each 1 ≤ i ≤ t, assume that we already know the cell σ′

of Ξi−1 that contains q (which is true initially when i = 1 since the only cell of Ξ0 is the entire plane). By checking all O(1) children of σ′, we find the cell σ ∈ Ξi containing q. Then, using the cone Cq (s), we perform a clipping operation on the binary search tree of C(σ) to find the generators of the cones of C(σ) that are in As(q), which takes O( log n) time. We do this until the last cutting Ξt. As t = O( log r) = O( log n), the above takes O( log 2 n) time plus linear time in the output size. In addition, for the last cutting Ξt, suppose that σ is the cell containing q. We find the generators of the cones of Cσ that are in As(q) using the data structure Dσ . By Lemma 4, this takes O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ) time plus linear time in the output size. This computes As(q) in a total of O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ + log 2 n + |Vis s(q)|) time. The correctness is based on the following observation: If a generator of a cone C ∈ C is in As(q) and σ is the cell of Ξt containing q, then C is either in Cσ or in C(σ′) for an ancestor cell σ′ of σ (we consider σ an ancestor cell of itself). Next, sorting the elements of As(q) can be done in O(nϵ′

+ k′) time for any ϵ′ > 0 by Lemma 3. Hence, computing Vis s(q) takes O(nϵ′

+ ( n/r )1/2+ ϵ + log 2 n + |Vis s(q)|) time in total. Since r ≤ n1−ϵ, the time is bounded by O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ + |Vis s(q)|) if we choose ϵ′ small enough. ◀

Finally, plugging Lemma 6 into our framework leads to the following result. 12 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

▶ Theorem 7. Given a simple polygon P with n vertices, let r be a parameter satisfying 1 ≤

r ≤ n1−ϵ for any constant ϵ > 0. A data structure of size O(nr +n log (n/r )) can be constructed in O(( nr + n log (n/r )) log n) time such that Vis (q) can be computed in O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ) time for any query point q ∈ P . In particular, setting r = 1 yields a data structure of O(n log n)

space, O(n log 2 n) preprocessing time, and O(n1/2+ ϵ) query time. 

Proof. We first construct a balanced decomposition of P together with the BD-tree T (P ).Let t = n/r .For each internal node v of T (P ), the diagonal dv divides Pv into two subpolygons. We construct a data structure of Lemma 6 for each subpolygon with respect to dv with parameter 

rv = max {1, n v /t } (as the r in Lemma 6), where nv = |Pv |; let Dv denote these two data structures. If rv = 1 , we call v a lower node ; otherwise v is an upper node . Note that if v is an upper node, then nv /r v = n/r .In addition, we construct a point location data structure on the triangulation formed by the leaf triangles of T (P ). This finishes our preprocessing. We next analyze the space and the preprocessing time. Computing the balanced decomposition T (P ) can be done in O(n) time [17]. Constructing the point location data structure takes O(n) space and time [15, 22]. In the following, we analyze the data structures Dv of the nodes v of T (P ).First of all, if rv = 1 for a node v, then by definition, nv /t ≤ 1 and thus nv ≤ t. As such, all descedants v′ of v are lower nodes because nv′ ≤ nv . This implies that all upper nodes form a connected subtree of T (P ) containing the root. Also, since n/r = nv /r v for upper nodes v and nv is geometrically decreasing along the path from the root to any leaf of T (P ),the depth of every lower node is Ω( log r). As the height of T (P ) is O( log n), all lower nodes are in the lowest Θ( log n − log r) = Θ( log (n/r )) levels of T (P ). Since the space of Dv for each lower node v is O(nv ), the total space of Dv of the lower nodes v in each level of T (P )

is O(n). Hence, the total space of Dv of all lower nodes v of T (P ) is O(n log( n/r )) .For the upper nodes, let T ′ denote the subtree comprising all upper nodes. By the definition of the balanced polygon decomposition of P , we have n/ 3 ≤ nv ≤ 2n/ 3 for each child v of the root. Suppose S(n) is the total space of Dv of all nodes v of T ′. Note that the space of Dv for the root v is O(nr ) = O(n2/t ). Then, we have the following recurrence relation: 

S(n) = max 

> n/ 3≤m≤2n/ 3

{S(m) + S(n − m + 2) } + O(n2/t ).

The recurrence solves to S(n) = O(n2/t ), which is O(nr ). Hence, the total space of the data structures Dv for all upper nodes v is O(nr ).In summary, the total space of the data structures Dv for all nodes v of T (P ) is O(nr +

n log( n/r )) . The preprocessing time analysis is similar, but has an additional log n factor. Given a query point q, we follow the query algorithm framework described in the beginning of Section 3.3 to process the nodes of T (P ) along the path from the leaf whose triangle containing q to the root. For each node v, we apply the query algorithm of the data structure 

Dv with query time O(( nv /r v )1/2+ ϵ) plus the output size. If v is an upper node, then 

(nv /r v )1/2+ ϵ = O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ) since nv /r v = n/r . If v is a lower node, then rv = 1 and 

nv ≤ t = n/r . Hence, (nv /r v )1/2+ ϵ = ( nv )1/2+ ϵ = O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ). As such, in addition to the output size, we spend O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ) time at each node v. Therefore, the total query time for computing Vis (q) is O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ log n + |Vis (q)|). As r ≤ n1−ϵ, we can write the time bound as O(( n/r )1/2+ ϵ + |Vis s(q)|) since the log n factor is absorbed by (n/r )ϵ. ◀Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 13 vivjvk 

> Figure 5 Illustrating a geodesic triangle (the gray region) formed by three geodesic paths.

# 4 A new polygon decomposition 

In this section, we introduce a new decomposition of P together with its associated data structure for answering visibility queries. Our decomposition decomposes P into geodesic triangles , a concept first introduced in [9], in which a balanced geodesic triangulation of P was proposed and it also decomposes P

into geodesic triangles. However, our decomposition differs fundamentally from the balanced geodesic triangulation in [9] and possesses several key properties, such as the gate property described in Section 1.1, that are essential for the efficiency of our visibility query algorithm. In the following, after defining geodesic triangles, we present a data structure for handling visibility queries with respect to a single geodesic triangle in Section 4.1. We then describe our new polygon decomposition in Section 4.2. 

Geodesic triangles. The geodesic path π(p, q ) is a shortest path in P between two points 

p and q. For three vertices vi, vj , and vk of P ordered clockwise along ∂P , consider the three geodesic paths π(vi, v j ), π(vj , v k), and π(vk, v i). If we remove the subpaths shared by any two of these three paths, then the region bounded by the remaining portions of the three paths is a geodesic triangle ; see Figure 5. A geodesic triangle has three sides , each being a concave chain that is a subpath of one of the three geodesic paths, and three apexes ,corresponding to the endpoints of its sides. In general, a geodesic triangle has exactly three apexes, although it may degenerate to an empty region when one of the three vertices vi, vj ,or vk lies on the geodesic path connecting the other two. 

# 4.1 A data structure for geodesic triangles 

Consider a geodesic triangle △, defined by three vertices pi, pj , and pk as discussed above. Each edge of △ is either an edge of P or a diagonal. For each diagonal d on ∂△, let Pd(△)

denote the subpolygon of P bounded by d that does not contain △. We refer to Pd(△) as the pocket of P separated by d from △. For simplicity, if d is an edge of P , we let Pd(△)

denote d itself. When △ is clear from context, we simply write Pd.We study two subproblems with respect to △. In the first subproblem, the query point q

lies in △, and the goal is to compute Vis (q). In the second subproblem, the query point q

lies in Pd for some diagonal d of ∂△, and we wish to compute Vis (P \ Pd, q ), i.e., the portion of Vis (q) that lies outside the pocket Pd. Our result is summarized in the following lemma, which will be used later. 14 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

▶ Lemma 8. With respect to a geodesic triangle △, a data structure of size O(n2) can be constructed in O(n2 log n) time such that, for any query point q, if q ∈ △ , then Vis (q) can be computed in O( log n) time, and if q ∈ Pd for some diagonal d on the boundary of △, then Vis (P \ Pd, q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. 

Intuitively, the motivation for having a query algorithm that computes Vis (P \ Pd, q )

is as follows. If Vis (Pd) is already available, then after obtaining Vis (P \ Pd, q ), we can compute Vis (q) by merging the two. To compute Vis (Pd) itself, we would like to apply the same algorithm recursively. For this recursive approach to work, we require an “appropriate” polygon decomposition of P . This motivates the new decomposition introduced in Section 4.2. In the rest of this subsection, we prove Lemma 8. 

# 4.1.1 The first subproblem of Lemma 8: queries from a geodesic triangle 

In the first subproblem, we wish to compute Vis (q) for any query point q ∈ △ .Let π be a side of △, which is a concave geodesic path. Define Pπ to be the union of Pd

for all edges d ∈ π. Note that △ and Pπ for all three sides π of △ together form a partition of P . In the following, we show how to compute Vis (Pπ , q ) for a side π of △. Vis (s) can then be obtained by merging Vis (Pπ , q ) for all three sides π of △.If π consists of a single diagonal d, then we can use the quadratic-space method described in Section 3.1. We follow the notation there, e.g., Rd, Ad, Vis d(q). Let nd = |Pd|. Note that the arrangement Ad has O(n2

> d

) cells. Hence, we can construct a data structure of O(n2

> d

)

space in O(n2 

> d

log nd) time such that Vis d(q) can be computed in O(log n) time. If π has more than one diagonal, we extend the idea to compute Vis π (q), defined as the union of Vis d(q) for all edges d ∈ π. Hence, Vis π (q) is the exterior visibility polygon of q

in Pπ through π. In the preprocessing, we overlay the arrangements Ad of all edges d ∈ π

to obtain an arrangement Aπ . Then, as above for Ad, points in the same cell of Aπ have the same Vis π (q), and Vis π (q) in two adjacent cells in Aπ differs by at most one element of 

Pπ . The size of Aπ is O(n2 

> π

) with nπ = |Pπ |. As before, we can use persistent binary search trees [14, 26] to store Vis π (q) for all cells of Aπ in a total of O(n2 

> π

) space and O(n2 

> π

log nπ )

time. We also construct a point location data structure on Aπ in O(n2 

> π

) time and space. Given a query point q, in O( log nd) time we can locate the cell of Aπ containing q and thus obtain the access to a binary search tree storing Vis π (q).After having Vis π (q), we can compute Vis (Pπ , q ) as follows. We determine the portion of 

π visible to q in P . Notice that since q ∈ △ and the three sides of △ are concave, the portion of π visible to q is a contiguous subpath of π delimited by a cone Cπ (q) whose bounding lines can be determined by computing the tangents from q to the other two sides of △ in 

O( log n) time. After Cπ (q) is computed, we perform a clipping operation on the tree storing Vis π (q), after which we obtain a binary search tree storing Vis (Pπ , q ).Finally, we can compute Vis (q) as follows. We first compute a binary search tree storing Vis (Pπ , q ) for each side π of △, which takes O( log n) time as discussed above. Since each side π of △ is concave, the cones Cq (π) for the three sides π of △ together partition the full angular range around q. This means that by simply merging the three trees for Vis (Pπ , q )

for the three sides π of △, we can obtain a binary search tree storing Vis (s). This merge operation of binary search trees can be done in O(log n) time. In summary, with O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) time preprocessing, Vis (q) can be computed in O(log n) time for any query point q ∈ △ . This proves the first part of Lemma 8. Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 15 qdPdPπ2Pπ1Cq (s)4s         

> Figure 6 The visibility of qin P\Pπis constrained by the cone Cq(s).

# 4.1.2 The second subproblem of Lemma 8: queries from a pocket 

In the second subproblem, the query point q is in Pd for some diagonal d on ∂△ and we wish to compute Vis (P \ Pd, s ). We can slightly modify the above algorithm to solve this subproblem as follows. Let π be the side of △ that contains d. Since π is concave, it is not difficult to see that q

cannot be visible to any point in the interior of Pd′ for any other diagonal d′ in π. Hence, Vis (P \ Pd, q ) = Vis (P \ Pπ , q ). In the following we focus on computing Vis (P \ Pπ , q ).Let π1 and π2 be the other two sides of △. Note that P \ Pπ = △ ∪ Pπ1 ∪ Pπ2 . We construct the same data structure as for the first subproblem above for the sides π1 and 

π2. In addition, we construct the GH data structure [17] in O(n) time. This finishes our preprocessing, which takes O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) time. Given a query point q ∈ Pd, we first find the segment s of d that is visible to q, which can be done in O( log n) time using the GH data structure [17]. If s = ∅, then Vis (P \ Pπ , q ) = ∅.Otherwise, the visibility of q in P \ Pπ is constrained by the cone Cq (s) defined by q and s;see Figure 6. As above, we first compute a binary search tree storing Vis π1 (q). The portion of π1 visible to q is determined by a cone Cq (π1) ⊆ Cq (s). The bounding lines of Cq (π1) can be determined by first computing the tangents from q to π1 and π2 in O( log n) time. We then do a clipping operation on the tree storing Vis π1 (q) by using Cq (π1) and thus obtain a tree for Vis (Pπ1 , q ), which takes O( log n) time. Similarly, we can obtain a tree storing Vis (Pπ2 , q )

in O( log n) time. Note that the two cones Cq (π1) and Cq (π2) are interior disjoint and share a common bounding line. Hence, by merging the two trees, we obtain a binary search tree storing the combinatorial representation of Vis (Pπ1 ∪ Pπ2 , q ), which is also the combinatorial representation of Vis (△ ∪ Pπ1 ∪ Pπ2 , q ) = Vis (P \ Pπ , q ) = Vis (P \ Pd, q ), because all three sides of △ are concave. In summary, we can compute Vis (P \ Pd, q ) in O( log n) time for a query point q ∈ Pd.The preprocessing takes O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) time. This proves the second part of Lemma 8. 

# 4.2 The new decomposition 

We now introduce a new decomposition of P , defined with respect to a designated edge of 

P . Let p1, p 2, . . . , p n be the vertices of P ordered clockwise along ∂P . In the following, we describe the decomposition with respect to the edge p1pn.16 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

We represent the decomposition by a decomposition tree Ψ. Let v∗ denote the root of Ψ.Each node v of Ψ corresponds to a subpolygon Pv and a gate dv , where dv is a diagonal of P

that separates Pv from the “outside world” P \ Pv , and all other edges of Pv are edges of P .Initially, we have Pv∗ = P and dv∗ = p1pn (since v∗ is the root, as a special case we allow 

dv∗ not to be a diagonal, i.e., we assume dv∗ connects P with the outside). Each node v also corresponds to a subpolygon Pcore (v) ⊆ Pv , called the core of Pv , which is the union of a collection of geodesic triangles. The core Pcore (v) and the subpolygons Pu

of all children u of v form a partition of Pv (thus Pu ⊆ Pv for each child u). Moreover, for every child u of v, we have |Pu| ≤ | Pv |/2. Hence, the sizes of the subpolygons Pv decrease geometrically along any root-to-leaf path in Ψ, and the height of Ψ is O(log n).At each node v of Ψ, we explicitly store the edges of Pcore (v). The cores of all nodes are interior-disjoint and together form a partition of P . Since no new vertices are introduced and no two edges of the decomposition intersect, the overall size of the decomposition and thus the total size of all cores is O(n). Because each core consists of geodesic triangles, our decomposition effectively partitions P into geodesic triangles. As will be seen later, when our decomposition is used to answer visibility queries, the property that the gate dv separates Pv from P \ Pv plays a crucial role. We refer to this as the gate property . Moreover, for any node v and any ancestor u of v, since Pv ⊆ Pu ⊆ P , the gate property also implies that dv separates Pv from Pu \ Pv .Section 4.3 presents the detailed construction of the decomposition Ψ. The following Theorem 9 is our main result for answering visibility queries using Ψ. Our results in Sections 5 and 6 will build upon this theorem. 

▶ Theorem 9. A data structure of size O(n2 log 4 n) can be constructed in O(n2 log 5 n) time for the decomposition Ψ such that, for any query point q, if q lies in the core Pcore (u) of a node u ∈ Ψ, then Vis (Pu, q ) can be computed in O( log n) time; and if q lies in Pv for a child 

v of u, then Vis (Pu \ Pv , q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. 

Proof. We only sketch the proof here; full details appear in Section 4.4. Consider the root v∗ of Ψ. For each geodesic triangle △ in the core Pcore (v∗), we build the data structure of Lemma 8 for △ in Pv∗ (which equals P ). We can show that this construction requires O(n2 log 4 n) space and O(n2 log 5 n) preprocessing time. Afterward, for any query point q ∈ P , if q ∈ Pcore (v∗), we can compute Vis (Pv∗ , q ) in O(log n) time; and if 

q ∈ Pv for a child v of v∗, we can compute Vis (Pv∗ \ Pv , q ) in O(log n) time. In general, for each node v ∈ Ψ, and for each geodesic triangle △ in Pcore (v), we build the data structure of Lemma 8 for △ within Pv . This requires O(n2 

> v

log 4 nv ) space and 

O(n2 

> v

log 5 nv ) preprocessing time, where nv = |Pv |. Since the sizes of the subpolygons Pv

decrease geometrically along every root-to-leaf path, and since the subpolygons Pv of nodes at the same level of Ψ are interior disjoint, the total space over all nodes of Ψ is O(n2 log 4 n),and the total preprocessing time is O(n2 log 5 n). After this preprocessing, the queries can be answered as stated in the theorem. ◀

As a quick demonstration on why Ψ is useful, we show that Vis (q) can be computed in O( log 2 n) time. Given a query point q, we first use a point location query to find the node v whose core Pcore (v) contains q. Then, we compute Vis (Pv , q ) in O( log n) time by Theorem 9. Next, we compute Vis (Pu \ Pv , q ) in O(log n) time, where u is the parent of v.Note that Vis (Pv , q ) ∪ Vis (Pu \ Pv , q ) is Vis (Pu, q ). Since Pv is separated from Pu \ Pv by the diagonal dv , we can obtain Vis (Pu, q ) by merging Vis (Pv , q ) and Vis (Pu \ Pv , q ) in O( log n)

time by Lemma 5. If we continue this until the root, we will obtain Vis (q). The total time is 

O(log 2 n) as the height of Ψ is O(log n).Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 17 

Remark. As in [9], our decomposition partitions P into geodesic triangles, although it is more intricate to describe. A natural question is whether the geodesic triangulation of [9] can be used instead. We initially pursued this approach, but several difficulties arose. In particular, one might hope that visibility always propagates through parent geodesic triangles; however, this is not the case. Roughly speaking, visibility proceeds through “kites” (following the terminology of [9]), rather than through the triangles themselves. In contrast, in our decomposition, as illustrated by the example above, visibility is always routed through the gates. Moreover, it seems unlikely that one can obtain results comparable to Theorem 9 using the standard geodesic triangulation in [9]. Indeed, such an approach would require preprocessing each geodesic triangle using Lemma 8 (as we did in the above sketched proof of Theorem 9). Since there are O(n) triangles and each requires quadratic preprocessing time, the total preprocessing time would become cubic. To overcome these obstacles, a more careful redesign of the triangulation process is necessary, which leads to our decomposition (e.g., we can show that the total preprocessing time for all our geodesic triangles is only near-quadratic as stated in Theorem 9). From this perspective, our approach may be viewed as a variation of the geodesic triangulation in [9] that is better suited for visibility queries. 

# 4.3 The construction of the decomposition Ψ

We now present the details of our decomposition and the decomposition tree Ψ.During the discussion, instead of directly arguing the gate property, we will establish two other properties that together guarantee the gate property as shown in the following lemma. 

▶ Lemma 10. Suppose that the following two properties hold for each non-root node v ∈ Ψ:(1) dv separates Pv from Pu \ Pv , where u is the parent of v; (2) the gate du of u is not in 

Pv . Then, the gate property holds for v, i.e., dv separates Pv from P \ Pv .

Proof. We prove the lemma by induction. Initially, if v is a child of the root v∗, then since 

dv separates Pv from Pu \ Pv , u = v∗, and Pv∗ = P , it is vacuously true that dv separates 

Pv from P \ Pv .We now inductively assume that du separates Pu from P \ Pu. We next argue that dv

separates Pv from P \ Pv . Indeed, consider two points p and p′ with p ∈ Pv and p′ ∈ P \ Pv .It suffices to show that the geodesic path π(p′, p ) must intersect dv . If p′ is in Pu, then since 

dv separates Pv from Pu \ Pv , then π(p′, p ) must intersect dv . If p′̸ ∈ Pu, then p′ ∈ P \ Pu.In this case, since p ∈ Pv ⊆ Pu, du̸ ⊆ Pv , and du separates Pu from P \ Pu, if we traverse from p′ to p along π(p′, p ), we must first cross du and then dv . The lemma thus follows. ◀

We next describe our decomposition. We will focus on explaining the children v of v∗.Specifically, we will define the core Pcore (v∗), the subpolygons Pv , and the gate dv for every child v of v∗. In particular, we will argue that the following three key properties hold for each v: (1) Pv is separated from P \ Pv by dv ; (2) dv∗ is not in Pv ; (3) Pv has no more than 

n/ 2 edges other than the gate dv . Note that the first two properties are those required in Lemma 10. To define the whole tree Ψ, we simply apply the same decomposition recursively on Pv for each child v of v∗.Let p∗ = pn/ 2, the middle point of ∂P (recall that vertices of P are indexed from p1 to pn

clockwise around ∂P ). We consider the geodesic triangle △∗ formed by the three geodesic paths π(p∗, p 1), π(p∗, p n), and π(p1, p n). Note that π(p1, p n) is the edge dv∗ = p1pn. We first consider the general case where △∗ is not empty, and we will discuss later that the empty case can be treated similarly. We add △∗ to the core Pcore (v∗).18 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons p1pnp∗ = p n

> 2

# b∗a∗B1B2d                

> Figure 7 The shaded region bounded by dis a pocket Pd(△∗).a∗b∗is the bride d∗on ∂△∗\dv∗.The bigger shaded region bounded by d∗is Pd∗(△∗).

Note that dv∗ is one side of △∗ and thus p1 and pn are two apexes of △∗. Let b∗ be the third apex (see Figure 7). Note that ∂△∗ \ dv∗ is the union of the other two sides of △∗.Let B1 denote the boundary of P from p1 clockwise to p∗ and B2 the boundary of P from 

p∗ clockwise to pn. We let both B1 and B2 contain p∗. Hence, ∂P = B1 ∪ B2 ∪ dv∗ . We say that a diagonal is a bridge if one vertex of it is in B1 \ { p∗} while the other is in B2 \ { p∗}.By definition, if b∗ = p∗, then ∂△∗ \ dv∗ has no bridge; otherwise, ∂△∗ \ dv∗ has exactly one bridge, denoted by d∗, which must have b∗ as a vertex (see Figure 7, where d∗ = a∗b∗). For each diagonal d of ∂△∗ \ dv∗ , if d is not a bridge, then it connects two vertices either both on B1 or both on B2. Recall we defined in Section 4.1 that the notation Pd(△∗) refer to the pocket of P separated by d from △∗ (see Figure 7). Observe that the edges of Pd(△∗)

other than d are all in B1 or all in B2. Hence, Pd(△∗) has no more than n/ 2 edges other than d. We create a child v for v∗ in Ψ with Pv = Pd(△∗) and the gate dv = d. In this way, dv separates Pv from P \ Pv and dv∗ = p1pn is not an edge of Pv . Hence, all three key properties hold for v.If d is a bridge, i.e., d = d∗, then b∗̸ = p∗. In this case, Pd∗ (△∗) contains vertices from both B1 and B2 (see Figure 7), and therefore, Pd∗ (△∗) may have more than n/ 2 edges other than d∗. We therefore cannot simply create a child for v∗ as above and need to resort to other approaches as follows. 

Decomposing Pd∗ (△∗) into subpockets. Let a∗ be the vertex of d∗ other than b∗ (see Figure 7). Then, π(p∗, a ∗) is a subpath of either π(p∗, p 1) or π(p∗, p n). To simplify the notation, let Q = Pd∗ (△∗) and π∗ = π(a∗, p ∗).The geodesic path π∗ decomposes the pocket Q into subpockets each of which is bounded by a subpath of π∗ and a sequence of edges of B1 or B2. If a subpocket is bounded by a subpath of π∗ and a sequence of edges of B1 (resp., B2), we call it a B1-bounded subpocket 

(resp., B2-bounded subpocket ); see Figure 8. For each subpocket Q, the subpath of π∗ on the boundary of Q is called the base of Q. We say that Q is closed if its base is a single edge; otherwise, it is open (see Figure 8). For a closed subpocket Q, since its edges other than its base edge are either all from B1

or all from B2, the number of its edges other than its base is at most n/ 2, and Q is separated from P \ Q by its base edge. Hence, we create a child v for v∗ in Ψ with Pv = Q and dv as the base edge of Q. Clearly, dv∗ is not in Pv . Hence, all three key properties hold for v.If Q is open, then we will need to further decompose it. The situation in this case becomes significantly more complicated and our main effort is to handle this case. Without loss of generality, we assume that Q is B1-bounded. Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 19 p1pnp∗ = p n

> 2

# b∗a∗B1B2QQ′pipj       

> Figure 8 The gray region Qis an open B1-bounded subpocket while the green region Q′is a closed B2-bounded subpocket.

Decomposing an open subpocket Q. Define Q∗ = P \ Q. We consider Q∗ a special subpocket . Following our above definition, Q∗ is a closed subpocket since it has only one edge of π∗. To differentiate, when we say “subpockets of P ”, we refer to all subpockets of Q and also Q∗; when we say “subpockets of Q”, we only refer to the subpockets inside Q. Unless otherwise stated, a subpocket of P refers to any subpocket of Q ∪ { Q∗}.To simplify the discussion, we assume that each edge e of π∗ is a diagonal. Indeed, this is the most general case because if e is an edge of P then we can assume there is an infinitely small subpocket separated by e. With this assumption, e is on the boundaries of two subpockets of P . In particular, if p∗ is a vertex of e, then one subpocket bounded by e

is closed while the other is open. In this case, we consider e a bridge in the open subpocket but not a bridge in the closed one. In this way, we have the following observation. 

▶ Observation 11. Each open subpocket Q of Q has exactly two bridges, which are the first and last edges of its base (see Figure 8). 

Proof. To see this, since the base of Q is a geodesic path (because it is a subpath of π∗)and Q is a simple polygon, the base of Q must be a concave chain, meaning that if we traverse on it, either we always make right turns or we always make left turns. Hence, the two end vertices of the base of Q must be in B1 while all other vertices are in B2 because Q

is B1-bounded (see Figure 8). This implies that among all edges on the base of Q, only the first and last edges are bridges. For other edges of Q not on its base, by definition, each of them connects two vertices of B1, meaning that it is not a bridge. ◀

We say that two subpockets of P are neighboring if they share a common edge of π∗. By definition, for two neighboring subpockets of Q, one of them is B1-bounded while the other is B2-bounded. Also, a closed subpocket has exactly one neighboring subpocket while an open one has multiple. For any open subpocket Q, since only the first and last edges of its base are bridges, Q has at most two neighboring open subpockets. The following simple observation implies that to compute Vis (q) for a point q ∈ Q, it suffices to consider Q and its neighboring subpockets. 

▶ Observation 12. For any point q ∈ Q, if a point p ∈ P is visible to q, then p is either in 

Q or in a neighboring subpocket of Q.

Proof. Assume to the contrary p is in other subpockets. Then, pq must cross two edges of 

π∗. Since π∗ is a geodesic path in P , no line segment in P can cross two edges of π∗. We thus obtain contradiction. ◀20 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons pkpja = piπlkB1B2          

> Figure 9 Illustrating the case a=pj. The gray region is Q. The left dotted polygonal chain is
> πlk. The red solid polygonal chain is in B1and the blue solid polygonal chain is in B2.

With the above concepts, we next discuss how to further decompose an open subpocket 

Q (again assume that Q is B1-bounded). Let π(Q) denote the base of Q. Let pi be the end vertex of π(Q) that is closer to a∗ along 

π∗ = π(a∗, p ∗) and pj the other end vertex (see Figure 8). By definition, i < j . Note that if we traverse π(Q) from pi to pj , we always make right turns. For simplicity of discussion, we consider the order of vertices of π(Q) from pi to pj as the left-to-right order so that we can use “left” and “right” to refer to the directions of π(Q). Note that π(Q) could be spiral. Let B1(Q) denote the portion of B1 in Q. Hence, pi is the first vertex and pj is the last vertex of B1(Q) if we order vertices of B1(Q) along B1 clockwise (and we also consider it the left-to-right order of B1(Q)). Also, the union of B1(Q) and π(Q) forms the boundary 

∂Q of Q.We pick the middle vertex pk of B1(Q) with k = ( i + j)/2, and connect pk to pi and pj

by geodesic paths, which yields a geodesic triangle, denoted by △k. Since the base π(Q) is a geodesic path and pk is not on π, △k cannot be empty. One side of △k is on π(Q) and we call it the base side ; the other two sides are called the non-base sides . Among the two non-base sides, the one that connects the leftmost vertex of the base side is called the left side while the other is called the right side (recall that we have a left-to-right order of π(Q);since the base side is a subpath of π(Q), we can talk about the “leftmost” and “rightmost” vertices). We add △k to the core Pcore (v∗) of the root v∗ of Ψ.Consider the left side of △k, denoted by πlk. Let a be the leftmost vertex of the base side of △k. Depending on whether a = pi, there are two cases. If a = pi, then no edge of πlk is a bridge and every edge of πlk connects two vertices of B1;see Figure 9. In this case, for each diagonal d of πlk, all vertices of Qd(△k) are in B1(Q),where Qd(△k) is the subpolygon of Q divided by d that does not contain △k. Hence, 

Qd(△k) has no more than n/ 2 edges other than d. We create a child v for v∗ in Ψ with 

Pv = Qd(△k) and gate dv = d. Since Pv does not contain dv∗ , all three key properties hold for v. In this case, the processing of the left side πlk is done. If a̸ = pi, then a is in B2 and the edge of πlk incident to a must be a bridge (see Figure 10); Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 21 pkpjpibB1B2aQab (4k )           

> Figure 10 Illustrating the case a̸=pj. The green region is Qab (△k). The union of the green region and the gray region is Q. The red solid polygonal chain is in B1and the blue solid polygonal chain is in B2.

let b denote the other vertex of the edge. Note that none of the other edges of πlk is a bridge. For each diagonal d of πlk with d̸ = ab , we create a child v for v∗ in the same way as above. For ab , the pocket Qab (△k) now also contains vertices of B2 (see Figure 10), and thus we cannot create a child for v∗ in the same way as above. Instead, we process 

Qab (△k) recursively. The reason we can do this is the following. By definition, the union of π(pi, a ), which is the portion of π(Q) between pi and a, and ab is a subpath of π(pi, p k) and thus it is the geodesic path π(pi, b ). In fact, ab is tangent to π(Q) at a.Since Qab (△k) is a simple polygon with π(pi, b ) on its boundary, π(pi, b ) is also a concave chain and we can consider π(pi, b ) as the base of Qab (△k) (note that π(pi, b ) also contains exactly two bridges at the two ends). Hence, Qab (△k) has the same “structure” as Q

and thus we can apply the above processing recursively. Note that the number of vertices of B1 in Qab (△k) is at most |B1(Q)|/2.The right side of △k can be processed symmetrically. The above process can be better represented by a tree TQ. Each node ν of TQ corresponds to a subpolygon Q(ν) of Q and also a non-empty geodesic triangle △ν , which is added to the core Pcore (v∗) of v∗ for Ψ. If ν is the root, then we have Q(ν) = Q and △ν = △k. In the above processing of πlk, if πlk has a bridge ab , then the root of TQ has a left subtree by processing Qab (△k) recursively (if ν is the left child of the root, then Q(ν) = Qab (△k)). The right subtree is defined similarly. The tree height is O( log n), or more precisely O( log |B1(Q)|)

since every time we pick the middle vertex of the portion of B1 in the current subpolygon 

Q(ν) to further decompose Q(ν). Note that as the base case, if B1(Q) contains a single vertex pk other than pi and pj , then the two non-base sides of △k are line segments pkpi

and pkpj , which are edges of P , and therefore the recursive step stops at Q.

Summary. The above defines the children v of v∗ in the decomposition tree Ψ. As mentioned before, the entire tree Ψ can be obtained by applying the same decomposition recursively on Pv for every child v of the root v∗. Since our decomposition does not introduce any new vertices and no two edges of the geodesic paths in the decomposition cross each other, the total size of the decomposition is O(n).The above discusses the case where the geodesic triangle △∗ is not empty. If it is empty, 22 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

then it becomes a special case and can be handled similarly. Indeed, in this case, either 

pn is in π(p∗, p 1) or p1 is in π(p∗, p n). We let π∗ be π(p∗, p 1) in the first case and π(p∗, p n)

in the second case. Hence, dv∗ = p1pn ⊆ π∗ holds in either case. We can simply treat the entire P as Q, and then apply the above decomposition. Since dv∗ is in π∗, according to our decomposition, it must lie on the base side of a geodesic triangle that is added to the core 

Pcore (v∗). Hence, dv∗ can never be in Pv for any child v of v∗. This ensures the second key property. The other two key properties follow from the same analysis. As computing a geodesic path in P can be done in linear time [18], a straightforward algorithm can decompose each open subpocket Q in O(|Q| log n) time since the height of 

TQ is O( log n). As such, decomposing all subpockets of Q takes O(|Q| log n) time, and thus computing all the children of the root v∗ of the decomposition tree Ψ can be done in 

O(n log n) time. As the height of Ψ is O( log n) and the subpolygons Pv of all nodes v in the same level of Ψ are interior disjoint, the total time for computing Ψ can be bounded by 

O(n log 2 n).

# 4.4 Proving Theorem 9: Constructing the visibility query data structure for Ψ

In this section, using the decomposition tree Ψ, we construct a data structure for Theorem 9. We start with constructing a point location data structure on the cores of all nodes of Ψ,which together form a decomposition of P . This takes O(n) additional time [15, 22]. Given a query point q, we can use a point location query to find the node v whose core Pcore (v)

contains q in O(log n) time. In what follows, we explain the data structure Dv∗ for Pv∗ of the root node v∗ of Ψ, in which case Pv∗ = P . The data structures for Pv of other nodes v can be built analogously. The data structure Dv∗ is used for answering the following queries: given a query point q,if q ∈ Pcore (v∗), then Vis (Pv∗ , q ) can be computed in O( log n) time, and if q is in Pv for a child v of v∗, then Vis (Pv∗ \ Pv , q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. 

# 4.4.1 Overview 

Recall that the core Pcore (v∗) is a set of geodesic triangles including △v∗ . For the case 

q ∈ △ v∗ , we can simply build the data structure of Lemma 8 with respect to △v∗ , after which Vis (Pv∗ , q ) can be computed in O( log n) time for any q ∈ △ v∗ . Also, if q ∈ Pv for a child v

of v∗ whose gate is a diagonal on the boundary of △v∗ (we say that v is associated with △v∗ ), then Vis (Pv∗ \ Pv , q ) can be computed in O( log n) time by Lemma 8. The preprocessing of the above for △v∗ takes O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) time in total. It remains to handle the case when the query point q is in Q. Suppose q is in a subpocket Q of Q. By Observation 12, to determine Vis (Pv∗ , q ), it suffices to consider Q

and Q’s neighboring subpockets. For each open subpocket Q of Q, we preprocess Q and its neighboring subpockets in the following. We assume that Q is B1-bounded and follow our previous notation. Recall that we have a tree TQ for Q and each node ν of TQ corresponds to a subpolygon 

Q(ν) and a geodesic triangle △ν , which belongs to the core Pcore (v∗). Furthermore, for each diagonal d on a non-base side of △ν such that d is not a bridge, v∗ has a child v with 

Pv = Qd(△ν ) and dv = d. We say that v is associated with △ν . In addition, for each diagonal 

d on the base of Q(ν) such that d is on π∗ and d is not a bridge, v∗ also has a child v with 

Pv being the subpolygon of Q divided by d that does not contain Q and dv = d. We also say that v is associated with △ν . Our goal for the preprocessing of Q and its neighboring Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 23 

subpockets is to compute Vis (Pv∗ , q ) in O( log n) time if q is in △ν for some node ν of TQ,and compute Vis (Pv∗ \ Pv , q ) in O( log n) time if q is in Pv for a child v of v∗ associated with 

△ν for some node ν of TQ.Define Q to be the union of Q and all its neighboring subpockets of P (including the special subpocket Q∗ = Pv∗ \ Q). Let m = |B1(Q)| and M = |Q|.For each node ν of TQ, we construct the data structure of Lemma 8 with respect to △ν .For each diagonal d of ∂△ν , recall that the notation Pd(△ν ) refers to the subpolygon of 

P divided by d that does not contain △ν . Let nd denote the number of the elements (i.e., vertices or edges) of Pd(△ν ) that are visible to d, and let Cd denote the set of visibility cones defined by these elements through d (the definition of the cones follows that in Section 3). According to the preprocessing algorithm of Lemma 8, the preprocessing takes O(∑ 

> d∈∂△ν

n2

> d

)

space and O(∑ 

> d∈∂△ν

n2 

> d

· log n) time in total. Therefore, to bound the total preprocessing time and space for the data structures of Lemma 8 for all nodes ν ∈ TQ, it suffices to bound ∑

> ν∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈∂△ν

n2

> d

. To this end, we will prove ∑

> v∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈∂△ν

nd = O(M log 2 n), which leads to ∑

> v∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈∂△ν

n2 

> d

= O(M 2 log 4 n).In addition, we will also show that the corresponding sets Cd of visibility cones can be computed in O(M 2 log 4 n) time. As such, the preprocessing for Q takes O(M 2 log 4 n) space and O(M 2 log 5 n) time in total. 

Outline. For each node ν of TQ, define Πν to be the union of the non-base sides of △ν , and let πν be the base side of △ν . In Section 4.4.2, we first prove ∑

> ν∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈Πν

nd = O(m log n)

and also show that the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(m log n)

time. Note that nd = O(|Pd(△ν )|) by definition. In Section 4.4.3, we prove the bound 

∑

> ν∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈πν

nd = O(M log 2 n) for the base sides πν and show that the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(M log 2 n) time. Section 4.4.4 finally summarizes everything. 

# 4.4.2 The non-base sides 

Consider the root ν of TQ. Following our previous notation, △ν is △k, formed by π(pi, p k),

π(pk, p j ), and π(pi, p j ). Recall that π(pi, p j ) is the base of Q. We argue that ∑ 

> d∈Πν

nd =

O(m). Note that the subpolygons Pd(△ν ) for all diagonals d ∈ Πν are interior disjoint. If 

d is not a bridge, then all vertices of Pd(△ν ) are in B1(Q). Hence, the sum of nd for all such non-bridge diagonals of Πν is O(m). Since each such Pd(△ν ) is a simple polygon, as discussed in Section 3, the visibility cones for these diagonals can also be computed in O(m)

time [18]. Next, consider a bridge d ∈ Πν . Without loss of generality, we assume that d is in the left side of △ν . Following our previous notation, d is ab . In this case, Pd(△ν ) contains vertices of both B1 and B2, and Pd(△ν ) is not Qd(△ν ) (because other than ab , Qd(△ν ) has another bridge); see Figure 11. We claim that all elements of Pd(△ν ) visible to any point of △ν through ab are in 

B1(Qd(△ν )) , i.e., the portion of B1 in Qd(△ν ). Indeed, without loss of generality, we assume that Pd(△ν ) is locally above ab . Then, if we shoot a ray from a along the direction opposite from b until the first point qa on ∂P d(△ν ) hit by the ray (see Figure 11), then all elements of Pd(△ν ) visible to any point of △ν through d must be in ˜Pd(△ν ), where ˜Pd(△ν ) is the subpolygon of Pd(△ν ) divided by aq a and locally above aq a. By definition, π(pi, a ) ∪ ab is a concave chain and is the base of Qd(△ν ), and thus elements of ˜Pd(△ν ) are all in B1(Qd(△ν )) .The claim thus follows. 24 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons pkpjpibB1B2aQab (4k )qa               

> Figure 11 The green region is Qab (△ν). The union of the green region and the gray region is
> Pd(△ν). The red solid polygonal chain is in B1and the blue polygonal chain is in B2. The portion of B1from pito bis B1(Qab (△ν)) .

The claim implies that nd is bounded by the number of elements of B1 in Qd(△ν ) that are visible to ab . Since |B1(Qd(△ν )) | = O(m), we obtain nd = O(m). To compute the elements of B1(Qd(△ν )) visible to ab and their corresponding visibility cones, we can do the following. First, we compute the point qa by a ray-shooting query in O( log n) time [9, 20] (after O(n)-time preprocessing for P ). Then, we can obtain ˜Pd(△μ) in O(m) time. Next, we compute all visibility cones using the simple polygon ˜Pd(△μ) in O(m) time [18]. In this way, in O(m + log n) time we can compute all visibility cones for d = ab .The above shows that ∑ 

> d∈Πν

nd = O(m) and the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(m + log n) time. Now consider the left child ν′ of ν in TQ, which is defined by the bridge ab of the left children side of △ν , i.e., Q(ν′) = Qab (△ν ); see Figure 11. Following the same analysis as above but with respect to Qab (△ν ), we can show that ∑ 

> d∈Πν′

nd = O(m′) and the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(m′ + log n) time, where m′ is the number of vertices of 

B1 in Qab (△ν ) and m′ ≤ m/ 2 by definition. Indeed, we are able to follow the same analysis as above for ν because as discussed before Qab (△ν ) has the same structure as Q, i.e., the base of Qab (△ν ) is a concave chain with two bridges at the two ends. Following the same analysis recursively, since the height of TQ is O( log m) (and the sum of m′ for all nodes in the same level is O(m)), we can obtain that ∑

> ν∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈Πν

nd = O(m log m) = O(m log n)

and the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(m log n) time. 

# 4.4.3 The base sides 

We now prove the bound ∑

> ν∈TQ

∑ 

> d∈πν

nd = O(M log 2 n) for the base sides πν and show that the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(M log 2 n) time. For each node ν ∈ TQ, recall that πν has at most two bridges, which are at the two ends of πv , and all other edges are on π(Q), the base of Q. The geodesic triangles △ν of all ν ∈ TQ

are interior disjoint, and thus each edge of π(Q) appears in πν for exactly one node ν ∈ TQ.For each diagonal d on π(Q), suppose that d is in πν for some node ν of TQ. Let Qd(△ν )

be the subpolygon of Q divided by d that does not contain △ν . By definition, Qd(△ν ) is a B2-bounded subpocket of Q neighboring to Q through d and Pd(△ν ) = Qd(△ν ). Hence, Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 25 

nd = O(|Qd(△ν )|) and the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(|Qd(△ν )|)

time. As such, the sum of nd for all non-bridge diagonals d in πν for all nodes ν ∈ TQ is bounded by the total size of all neighboring subpockets of Q, which is O(M ). Also, the corresponding visibility cones can be computed in O(M ) time. It remains to bound the sum of nd for bridges d ∈ πν for all nodes ν ∈ TQ.For each node ν ∈ TQ, let Q(ν) denote the union of Q(ν) and the neighboring subpockets of Q(ν). Again, the base side πν of △ν has at most two bridges, which are the leftmost and rightmost edges of πν , respectively. If the leftmost edge of πν is a bridge, we call it the left bridge and denote it by lν . If the rightmost edge of πν is a bridge, we call it the right bridge 

and denote it by rν . In that follows, we prove ∑ 

> ν∈TQ

nlν = O(M log 2 n), and we can prove the same bound for the right bridges rν . We will also show that the corresonding visibility cones can be computed in O(M log 2 n) time. 

Proving the bound ∑ 

> ν∈TQ

nlν = O(M log 2 n). For each node ν ∈ TQ, define Z(ν) as the set of elements of Q visible to any point of △ν through the left bridge lν of πν . In other words, Z(ν) is the set of elements of Qlν (△ν ) visible to at least one point of lν , where 

Qlν (△ν ) is the subpolygon of Q divided by lν that does not contain △ν . By definition, we have Z(ν) ⊆ Qlν (△ν ). Note that if △ν does not have a left bridge lν , then Z(ν) = ∅. One reason we introduce Z(ν) is that nlν = O(|Z(ν)|) holds. Hence, to bound nlν , we can bound 

O(|Z(ν)|) instead. In addition, we will define a subpolygon A(ν) ⊆ Q with the following invariant (called 

A’s invariant ): Z(μ) ⊆ A(ν) holds for μ = ν and any node μ in the right subtree of ν. Hence, to bound |Z(μ)|, we can bound A(ν). To prove ∑ 

> ν∈TQ

nlν = O(M log 2 n), we will prove 

∑ 

> ν∈TQ

|A(ν)| = O(M log 2 n). As will be seen, A(ν) is either Q(ν) or A(ν′) for some ancestor 

ν′ of ν such that ν is in the right subtree of ν′.For the root ˆν of TQ, we let A( ˆν) = Q, which is also Q( ˆν), and thus A’s invariant obviously holds for ˆν. We next consider a child ν of ˆν. There are two cases depending on whether ν is the left or right child of ˆν.

Right child case. We first assume ν is the right child of ˆν, i.e., the vertices of B1 in Q(ν)

are between pk and pj (see Figure 12). Depending on whether πν has a left bridge, there are two subcases. If πν has a left bridge (see Figure 12), then a crucial observation is that ν does not have a left subtree because the left non-base side of △ν cannot have a bridge according to our decomposition of Q. In this case, we define A(ν) = A( ˆν), which is Q. Hence, 

A’s invariant clearly holds for ν.If πν does not have a left bridge (see Figure 13), then Z(ν) = ∅ by definition. In this case, the key observation is that for any node μ in the right subtree of ν, Z(μ) ⊆ Q(ν)

must hold. To see this, we give a brief explanation here and a more detailed argument is given in the proof of Lemma 13. Indeed, since πν does not have a left bridge, the left side of △ν must contain a bridge d that is tangent to the base of Q (see Figure 13). Also, the right side of △ˆν has a bridge d′ (in fact, Q(ν) is Qd′ (△ˆν )). The two bridges 

d and d′ along with the portion of the base of Q between them is a geodesic path (specifically, it is a subpath of the geodesic path containing the left side of △ν ; see Figure 13). For any point q in △μ for any node μ in the right subtree of ν, suppose that q is visible to a point p ∈ Q \ Q(ν) through the left bridge lμ of △μ (i.e., pq 

intersects lμ). Then, pq must cross both d and d′, which is not possible since a line segment cannot cross a geodesic path twice. Hence, we have Z(μ) ⊆ Q(ν).26 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons pkpjpiB1B2Q(ν)

Figure 12 The gray region is Q(ν) for the right child ν of ˆν. The two non-base sides of △ν are marked with green dashed segments. The orange dashed segment on the base side πν of △ν is the left bridge lν of πν . In this case, ν cannot have a left subtree in TQ.pkpjpiB1B2△ˆν△νd′d

Figure 13 Illustrating the geodesic triangles △ˆν (the gray region) and △ν (the green region). For any μ in the right subtree of ν, △μ must be “right” of △ν .

In light of the observation, we set A(ν) = Q(ν). This means that the right subtree of 

ν can be treated independently with respect to Q(ν).

Left child case. If ν is the left child of ˆν, then for any node μ in the right subtree of ν,according to our decomposition, Qlμ (△μ) ⊆ Q(ν). Since Z(μ) ⊆ Qlμ (△μ) by definition, we obtain Z(μ) ⊆ Q(ν). Therefore, we set A(ν) = Q(ν), meaning that the right subtree of ν can be treated independently with respect to Q(ν).In general, consider any other node ν in the tree TQ. Assume that A(ν′) for all ancestors 

ν′ of ν have been set and A’s invariant holds for ν′. We define A(ν) as follows. If πν has a left bridge lν , then lν must be on the right side of △ν′ of the lowest ancestor 

ν′ of ν with ν in the right subtree of ν′. In this case, we set A(ν) = A(ν′). To see that A’s invariant holds for ν, consider a node μ that is either ν or in the right subtree of ν. Since ν

is in the right subtree of ν′, μ is also in the right subtree of ν′. Since A’s invariant holds for Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 27 

ν′, we have Z(μ) ⊆ A(ν′). As A(ν) = A(ν′), we obtain Z(μ) ⊆ A(ν). Hence, A’s invariant holds for ν.If πν does not have a left bridge, then Z(ν) = ∅. In this case, we set A(ν) = Q(ν). The following lemma guarantees that A’s invariant holds for ν.

▶ Lemma 13. If πν does not have a left bridge, then for any node μ in the right subtree of 

ν, Z(μ) ⊆ Q(ν).

Proof. Since πν does not have a left bridge, according to our decomposition, the left side of 

△ν must contain a bridge d, which is tangent to the base of Q.Let ν′ be the lowest ancestor of ν such that ν is in the right subtree of ν′. According to our decomposition, the right side of △ν′ has a bridge d′ (e.g., in Figure 13, one can replace ˆν

by ν′). The two bridges d and d′ along with the portion of the base of Q between them is a geodesic path (specifically, it is a subpath of the geodesic path that contains the left side of 

△ν ). Consider a node μ in the right subtree of ν. By definition, Z(μ) ⊆ Qlμ (△μ). According to our decomposition, since μ is in the right substree of ν, we have Qlμ (△μ) ⊆ Q(ν) ∪ Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ),where Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ) is the subpolygon of Q divided by d′ containing △ν′ . In addition, since d is a bridge in the left side of △ν and μ is in the right subtree of ν, by the definition of v′, d

separates Q(μ) from Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ) and thus also separates △μ from Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ) since △μ ⊆ Q(μ).According to our decomposition, △μ ⊆ Q(μ) ⊆ Q(ν) ⊆ Qd′ (△ν′ ) and thus d′ also separates 

△μ from Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ). Hence, both d and d′ separate △μ from Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ). This means that if there is a point p ∈ Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ) visible to a point q ∈ △ μ, then pq must cross both d and 

d′. But this is impossible since d and d′ are in a geodesic path. Therefore, no point of 

Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ) can be visible to any point of △μ, implying that Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ) ∩ Z(μ) = ∅. Since 

Z(μ) ⊆ Qlμ (△μ) ⊆ Q(ν) ∪ Q′ 

> d′

(△ν′ ), we obtain Z(μ) ⊆ Q(ν).The above discusses the case where ν′ exists. If not, then we simply have Qlμ (△μ) ⊆ Q(ν).Therefore, we also obtain Z(μ) ⊆ Qlμ (△μ) ⊆ Q(ν). ◀

Since Z(ν) ⊆ A(ν) for each node ν of TQ, we have ∑ 

> ν∈TQ

nlν = O(∑ 

> ν∈TQ

|A(ν)|). Also, for each ν, the corresponding visibility cones for lν can be found in A(ν), which takes 

O(|A(ν)|) time [18] since A(ν) is a simple polygon. Hence, computing all visibility cones takes O(∑ 

> ν∈TQ

|A(ν)|) time. The following lemma gives a bound for ∑ 

> ν∈TQ

|A(ν)|.

▶ Lemma 14. ∑ 

> ν∈TQ

|A(ν)| = O(M log 2 n).

Proof. We partition all nodes ν ∈ TQ into two categories: (1) A(ν) = Q(ν); (2) A(ν)̸ = Q(ν).For the first category, it suffices to bound ∑ 

> ν

|Q(ν)|. Observe that Q(ν) for all nodes ν at the same level of TQ are interior disjoint, and therefore, the sum of their sizes is O(M ). As 

TQ has O( log m) levels, we obtain ∑ 

> ν

|Q(ν)| = O(M log m). We next analyze the second category. If A(ν)̸ = Q(ν), then by our way of defining A(·) for the nodes of TQ, A(ν) must be equal to A(ν′) = Q(ν′) for some ancestor ν′ such that ν is in the right subtree of ν′. Furthermore, 

ν cannot have a left subtree. To see this, since A(ν)̸ = Q(ν), πν has a left bridge that is also on the right side of △ν′′ for an ancestor ν′′ of ν such that ν is in the right subtree of ν′′ . This implies that the left side of △ν cannot have a bridge, and thus ν cannot have a left child. Using the above property, we claim that in the right subtree of ν′ there is at most one node μ in each level such that A(μ) = A(ν′). Indeed, suppose to the contrary that there are two nodes μ1 and μ2 in the same level with A(μ1) = A(μ2) = A(ν′). Let μ0 be the lowest common ancestor of μ1 and μ2. Without loss of generality, we assume that μ1 is in the left 28 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

subtree of μ0 and μ2 is in the right subtree of μ0. Since A(μ1) = A(μ2) = A(ν′), according to our way of defining A(·), both μ1 and μ2 must be in the right subtree of ν′. Therefore, 

μ0 is also in the right subtree of ν′. Since A(μ2) = A(ν′) and μ2 is in the right subtree of 

μ0, according to our way of defining A(·), A(μ0) must also be A(ν′) (this is because for any node μ ∈ TQ, unless A(μ) = Q(μ), A(μ) is always equal to A(μ′) of the lowest ancestor μ′ of 

μ with μ in the right subtree of μ′). By the property discussed above, μ0 cannot have a left subtree. But this contradicts the fact that μ1 is in the left subtree of μ0. The claim thus follows. Again by our way of defining A(·), no node μ in the left subtree of ν′ can have A(μ) = A(ν′),which is Q(ν′).The above implies that Q(ν′) will be included in ∑ 

> ν

|A(ν)| at most O( log m) times since the height of TQ is O( log m). Hence, ∑ 

> ν

|Aν | is no more than O( log n) times ∑ 

> ν

|Q(ν)|. As 

∑ 

> ν

|Q(ν)| = O(M log m), we obtain ∑ 

> ν

|Aν | = O(M log 2 m), which is O(M log 2 n) since 

m ≤ n. The lemma thus follows. ◀

# 4.4.4 Summary 

In summary, we can construct a data structure for an open subpocket Q of Q in O(M 2 log 4 n)

space and O(M 2 log 5 n) time such that for any query point q, if q is in △ν for some node ν

of TQ, then Vis (Pv∗ , q ) can be computed in O( log n) time, and if q is in Pv for a child v of v∗

that is associated with △v∗ or △ν for a node ν ∈ TQ, then Vis (Pv∗ \ Pv , q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. We construct the above data structure for all B1-bounded open subpockets Q of Q. Since all subpockets of Q are interior disjoint and each B2-bounded subpocket can be a neighboring subpocket of at most two B1-bounded subpockets (and the special subpocket Q∗ can be a neighboring subpocket of at most one subpocket of Q), the sum of M for all such Q’s is O(n). Hence, the data structures for all B1-bounded subpockets can be constructed in 

O(n2 log 4 n) space and O(n2 log 5 n) time. Similarly, we construct the same data structures for all B2-bounded open subpockets, which also takes O(n2 log 4 n) space and O(n2 log 5 n)

time. After that, for any query point q, if q is in the core Pcore (v∗), then Vis (Pv∗ , q ) can be computed in O( log n) time, and if q is in Pv for a child v of v∗, then v must be associated with △v∗ or △ν for a node ν ∈ TQ for some open subpocket Q of Q and thus Vis (Pv∗ \ Pv , q )

can be computed in O(log n) time. This finishes the preprocessing for the root v∗ of the decomposition tree Ψ. The children of the root can then processed recursively. In general, for each node v ∈ Ψ, for each geodesic triangle △ of the core Pcore (v), we build the data structure of Lemma 8 for △ in Pv . This takes O(n2 

> v

log 4 nv ) space and O(n2 

> v

log 5 nv ) preprocessing time, where nv = |Pv |. As the sizes of the subpolygons Pv decrease geometrically along any root-to-leaf path and the subpolygons 

Pv for all nodes v at the same level of Ψ are interior disjoint, the total space of the data structures for the entire Ψ is O(n2 log 4 n) and the total preprocessing time is O(n2 log 5 n).In summary, after O(n2 log 4 n) space and O(n2 log 5 n) time preprocessing, given a query point q, if q is in the core Pcore (v) for a node v of Ψ, then Vis (Pv , q ) can be computed in 

O( log n) time, and if q is in Pv of a child v of a node u, then Vis (Pu \ Pv , q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. This proves Theorem 9. 

# 5 A data structure of optimal query time 

In this section, we present our visibility query data structure of O(n2+ ϵ, n 2+ ϵ, log n) complex-ity, based on the new decomposition introduced in Section 4. Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 29 

Preprocessing. We first construct the decomposition tree Ψ and build the data structure of Theorem 9. This requires O(n2 log 4 n) space and O(n2 log 5 n) preprocessing time. For each node v ∈ Ψ, recall that all edges of the subpolygon Pv are edges of P , except for the gate dv . For simplicity, let |Pv | denote the number of edges of P that belong to Pv .Let r be a parameter with 1 ≤ r ≤ n. A node v of Ψ is called a border node if |Pvp | ≥ n/r 

and |Pv | < n/r , where vp denotes the parent of v. By definition, each leaf-to-root path in Ψ contains at most one border node. This further implies that the subpolygons Pv

corresponding to all border nodes v are edge-disjoint. The border nodes, together with all their ancestors in Ψ, form a subtree Ψb of Ψ. Note that Ψb includes the root and has all border nodes as its leaves (hence, the border nodes indeed form the “border” of Ψb). We use B(Ψ) to denote the set of all border nodes of Ψ.We further have the following lemma. 

▶ Lemma 15. The number of internal nodes of Ψb is O(r).

Proof. Let Ψ′ 

> b

denote the subtree of Ψb obtained by removing all its leaves. Our goal is to show that Ψ′ 

> b

contains O(r) nodes. By definition, |Pv | ≥ n/r holds for every node v of Ψ′

> b

. Since the edges of Pv for all leaves 

v ∈ Ψ′ 

> b

are disjoint, Ψ′ 

> b

has O(r) leaves. According to our decomposition, |Pv | ≤ | Pvp |/2

holds for every non-root node v ∈ Ψ.For any value m, let Vm denote the set of nodes v ∈ Ψ′ 

> b

satisfying m/ 2 < |Pv | ≤ m. For any two nodes u, v ∈ Vm, it is impossible for one to be an ancestor of the other. Indeed, suppose to the contrary that u is an ancestor of v. Then we would have |Pu| ≤ | Pv |/2 ≤ m/ 2,contradicting the condition m/ 2 < |Pu|. Hence, Pu and Pv are interior disjoint, which implies that |Vm| ≤ 2n/m .The total number of nodes in Ψ′ 

> b

is therefore bounded by 

|Vn| + |Vn/ 2| + |Vn/ 4| + · · · + |Vn/r | ≤ 2 + 4 + 8 + · · · + 2 r = O(r).

The lemma thus follows. ◀

We further perform the following preprocessing. For each internal node v ∈ Ψb, we construct a data structure Dv with respect to the gate dv such that, for any point q ∈ Pv ,Vis (P \ Pv , q ) can be computed in O( log n) time. This corresponds to a diagonal-separated subproblem and requires O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) preprocessing time [2], as described in Section 3.1. Since Ψb has O(r) internal nodes by Lemma 15, constructing the data structures for all these nodes takes O(n2r) space and O(n2r log n) preprocessing time in total. For each leaf v ∈ Ψb, we recursively preprocess Pv and the subtree of Ψ rooted at v. This completes the preprocessing phase. We now analyze the overall space. Let S(n) denote the total space of the preprocessing (excluding the data structure of Theorem 9). We have the following recurrence: 

S(n) = ∑

> v∈B(Ψ)

S(|Pv |) + O(n2r).

Since |Pv | < n/r for every node v ∈ B(Ψ) , and the subpolygons Pv for all v ∈ B(Ψ) are edge-disjoint (implying that ∑ 

> v∈B(Ψ)

|Pv | ≤ n), by setting r = O(nϵ) for any constant ϵ > 0,the recurrence solves to S(n) = O(n2+ ϵ).Similarly, the preprocessing time is also O(n2+ ϵ). Including the data structure of The-orem 9, the total preprocessing requires O(n2+ ϵ) space and time. 30 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

Queries. Recall that the data structure of Theorem 9 includes a point location structure for the cores Pcore (v) of the nodes v ∈ Ψ, which together form a decomposition of P .Given a query point q, we first perform a point location query to determine the node v of 

Ψ whose core Pcore (v) contains q. Then, by Theorem 9, we compute Vis (Pv , q ) in O( log n)

time. Depending on whether v is an internal node of Ψb, we distinguish two cases. If v is an internal node of Ψb, then using the data structure Dv , we compute Vis (P \ Pv , q )

in O( log n) time. Finally, by Lemma 5, we merge Vis (Pv , q ) and Vis (P \ Pv , q ) in O( log n)

time to obtain Vis (q). Thus, in this case, computing Vis (q) takes O( log n) time in total. If v is not an internal node of Ψb, then by following the path from v to the root of 

Ψ, we find a border node v′. Using the recursively constructed data structure for Pv′ ,we compute Vis (Pv′ , q ) recursively. Let u be the parent of v′. By definition, u is an internal node of Ψb. By Theorem 9, we compute Vis (Pu \ Pv′ , q ) in O( log n) time, and by Lemma 5, we merge Vis (Pv′ , q ) and Vis (Pu \ Pv′ , q ) in O( log n) time to obtain Vis (Pu, q ).Finally, using the data structure Du, we compute Vis (P \ Pu, q ) in O( log n) time and merge it with Vis (Pu, q ), again in O(log n) time, to obtain Vis (q).Let Q(n) denote the query time. Since |Pv′ | < n/r , the recursive computation of Vis (Pv′ , q ) takes Q(n/r ) time. Hence, the recurrence relation is 

Q(n) = Q(n/r ) + O(log n),

which solves to Q(n) = O(log n) for r = nϵ, where ϵ is a constant. The following theorem summarizes our result. 

▶ Theorem 16. Given a simple polygon P with n vertices, a data structure of size O(n2+ ϵ)

can be constructed in O(n2+ ϵ) time such that the visibility polygon Vis (q) can be computed in 

O(log n) time for any query point q ∈ P .

Remark. One may wonder whether the balanced decomposition T (P ) from Section 3.3 could replace our decomposition Ψ to achieve the same result. This, however, appears challenging because T (P ) does not satisfy the gate property. Indeed, each subpolygon in 

T (P ) may connect to the “outside world” through up to O( log n) diagonals. This limitation is precisely why we introduce a new decomposition for P .

# 6 A quadratic-space data structure 

In this section, we present our data structure of complexity O(n2 log n, n 2, log n log log n). We will first give a data structure of O(n2 log 5 n, n 2 log 4 n, log n log log n) using our decomposition 

Ψ. By integrating it with the framework in Section 3.3, we will reduce the space to O(n2)

and reduce the preprocessing time to O(n2 log n), while keeping the same query time. In the preprocessing phrase, we compute the decomposition tree Ψ and the data structure of Theorem 9. This takes O(n2 log 4 n) space and O(n2 log 5 n) preprocessing time. 

Super-levels. We partition Ψ into O( log log n) super-levels . Each super-level consists of a collection of subtrees of Ψ, and we refer to each such subtree as a component subtree of the super-level. The i-th super-level Ψi, with 1 ≤ i ≤ O(log log n), is defined as follows. We assume that the set Ri of the roots of all component subtrees of Ψi is already known and that the following algorithm invariants hold for Ri: (1) |Pv | ≤ 2n/ 22i

for every node 

v ∈ Ri; (2) the subpolygons Pv for all v ∈ Ri are edge-disjoint; and (3) for each node v ∈ RiBhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 31 

with i > 0, its parent lies in the (i − 1) -th super-level. Initially, when i = 0 , the set R0

consists of a single node that is the root of Ψ, and thus all invariants hold for R0.We now define Ψi. Consider a node v ∈ Ri. Let Ψ( v) denote the subtree of Ψ rooted at 

v. We borrow several concepts from Section 5. A non-root node u of Ψ( v) is called a border node of Ψ( v) if |Pup | ≥ | Pv |/22i

and |Pu| < |Pv |/22i

, where up is the parent of u. The border nodes, together with all their ancestors in Ψ( v), form a subtree Ψb(v) of Ψ( v). Let Ψi(v)

denote the subtree of Ψb(v) obtained by removing all its leaves, and let Bv denote the set of border nodes of Ψ( v). We then define 

Ψi = ⋃

> v∈Ri

Ψi(v) and Ri+1 = ⋃

> v∈Ri

Bv .

We have the following observation. 

▶ Observation 17. All algorithm invariants hold for Ri+1 .

Proof. Consider a node u ∈ Bv for some v ∈ Ri. By definition, |Pu| ≤ | Pv |/22i

. Since 

|Pv | ≤ 2n/ 22i

, we obtain |Pu| ≤ 2n/ 22i+1 

. This proves the first invariant. For the second invariant, by definition, Pu of all nodes u ∈ Bv are edge disjoint (this is because the path from any leaf to the root of Ψ( v) has exactly one border node). Since Pv

for all nodes v ∈ Ri are edge disjoint, we obtain that Pu for all nodes u ∈ Ri+1 are edge disjoint. This proves the second invariant. By definition, the parent of each node of Ri+1 is in the i-th super-level Ψi. Therefore, the third invariant also holds. ◀

Finally, note that if |Pv | = O(2 2i

) for any v ∈ Ri, we simply set Ψi(v) = Ψ( v), which marks the last super-level. Since |Pv | ≤ 2n/ 22i

, this occurs for i = O( log log n), implying that the total number of super-levels is O(log log n).

Preprocessing. With the super-levels defined above, we perform the following preprocessing. Consider the i-th super-level Ψi. For each node v ∈ Ri and each node u ∈ Ψi(v), note that v is an ancestor of u in Ψ. By the gate property, Pu is separated from Pv \ Pu by the gate du of u. We construct a data structure Du(v) for Pu with respect to du in Pv , such that, for any query point q ∈ Pu, Vis (Pv \ Pu, q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. This is a diagonal-separated subproblem and such a data structure can be constructed in O(|Pv |2)

space and O(|Pv |2 log n) preprocessing time [2], as described in Section 3.1. We now analyze the total space required for the data structures in Ψi. By the same argument as in Lemma 15, we have |Ψi(v)| = O(2 2i

) since Ψi(v) consists of the internal nodes of Ψb(v). Hence, the total space for all data structures Du(v), over all nodes u ∈ Ψi(v)

and all v ∈ Ri, is O(∑ 

> v∈Ri

|Pv |2 · 22i

). Because the subpolygons Pv for all v ∈ Ri are edge-disjoint, we have ∑ 

> v∈Ri

|Pv | = O(n). Moreover, since |Pv | ≤ 2n/ 22i

, it follows that 

∑ 

> v∈Ri

|Pv |2 = O(n2/22i

). Therefore, the total space of all data structures in the i-th super-level is O(n2), and the total preprocessing time is O(n2 log n).Hence, building the data structures for all O(log log n) super-levels takes O(n2 log log n)

space and O(n2 log n log log n) preprocessing time. Including the preprocessing for Theorem 9, the total space becomes O(n2 log 4 n) and the total preprocessing time is O(n2 log 5 n).

Queries. Given a query point q, by a point location query, we find the node u of Ψ whose core Pcore (u) contains q. We then compute Vis (Pu, q ) in O(log n) time using Theorem 9. 32 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

Assume that u belongs to the i-th super-level for some i, i.e., u ∈ Ψi. Let v be the node in Ri such that u ∈ Ψi(v). Using the data structure Du(v), we compute Vis (Pv \ Pu, q ) in 

O(log n) time. Since Pu is separated from Pv \ Pu by the gate du, we can obtain Vis (Pv , q )

by merging Vis (Pu, q ) and Vis (Pv \ Pu, q ) in O(log n) time using Lemma 5. If i = 0 , then Pv = P , and thus Vis (q) = Vis (Pv , q ) is already computed. Otherwise, let 

u′ be the parent of v. By the algorithm invariants, u′ lies in the (i − 1) -th super-level. By Theorem 9, we can compute Vis (Pu′ \ Pv , q ) in O( log n) time. Since Pv is separated from 

Pu′ \ Pv by the gate dv , we can merge Vis (Pv , q ) and Vis (Pu′ \ Pv , q ) in O( log n) time to obtain Vis (Pu′ , q ). As u′ lies in the (i − 1) -th super-level, we repeat the same procedure until reaching the 0-th super-level, after which Vis (q) is obtained. Since there are O(log log n) super-levels and each super-level requires O(log n) time, the total query time is O(log n log log n). For reference, we summarize the result below. 

▶ Lemma 18. We can construct a data structure of size O(n2 log 4 n) in O(n2 log 5 n) time for P such that Vis (q) can be computed in O(log n log log n) time for any query point q ∈ P .

We further reduce the preprocessing complexities in the following theorem. 

▶ Theorem 19. Given a simple polygon P with n vertices, a data structure of size O(n2)

can be constructed in O(n2 log n) time such that the visibility polygon Vis (q) can be computed in O(log n log log n) time for any query point q ∈ P .

Proof. We follow the framework of Section 3.3 to construct the balanced decomposition 

T (P ) and solve the diagonal-separated subproblems using the quadratic-space method of [2], as reviewed in Section 3.1. This requires O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) preprocessing time. Let Tt(P ) denote the subtree of T (P ) consisting of its top t levels, where t is the smallest integer such that the subpolygon Pv at every node v of the t-th level has size at most n/ log 5 n.By the definition of T (P ), we have t = O(log log n).For each leaf v ∈ T t(P ), we construct a data structure Dv as in Lemma 18 for Pv . Each such data structure requires O(|Pv |2 log 4 n) space and O(|Pv |2 log 5 n) preprocessing time. Hence, the total preprocessing time for all data structures Dv of the leaves v ∈ T t(P ) is 

O(∑ 

> v∈L

|Pv |2 log 5 n), where L denotes the set of leaves of Tt(P ). Since the subpolygons Pv

for all leaves v ∈ L form a partition of P , we have ∑ 

> v∈L

|Pv | = O(n). Furthermore, because 

|Pv | ≤ n/ log 5 n for all v ∈ L, it follows that ∑ 

> v∈L

|Pv |2 = O(n2/ log 5 n). Thus, the total preprocessing time of all Dv is O(n2), and the total space is also O(n2).This completes the preprocessing, which requires O(n2) space and O(n2 log n) time in total. For a query point q ∈ P , we first locate the leaf node v ∈ L such that Pv contains q,which takes O( log n) time using a point location query. Then, by Lemma 18, we compute Vis (Pv , q ) in O( log n log log n) time using Dv . Next, as described in Section 3.3, we use the diagonal-separated data structure to compute Vis (Pu, q ) in O( log n) time for the parent u of 

v. In general, by following the path from v to the root in T (P ), Vis (q) can be computed in an additional O( log n log log n) time since the path has O( log log n) nodes. Therefore, the total query time for computing Vis (q) is O(log n log log n). ◀

# 7 The boundary case 

In this section, we present our results for the boundary case in which the query point q

is required to be on the boundary of P . We give two data structures, one based on the algorithmic framework in Section 3.3, and the other based on our new polygon decomposition Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 33 

Ψ and following a similar framework to Section 5. Both results rely on solving a diagonal-separated subproblem which we discuss first in the following. 

# 7.1 A diagonal-separated subproblem 

Let d be a diagonal that divides P into two subpolygons Pℓ and Pr . Without loss of generality, we assume that d is vertical and Pℓ is locally left of d. Let ∂P r = Pr ∩ ∂P , and similarly, let 

∂P ℓ = Pℓ ∩ ∂P . The diagonal-separated subproblem is to compute Vis (Pℓ, q ) for any query point q ∈ ∂P r .Note that the two endpoints of d are also the endpoints of ∂P r . We will consider ∂P r aone-dimensional domain. For each element w (i.e., a vertex or an edge) of Pℓ, if the cone Cw

(with respect to d, as defined in Section 3.1) is not empty, then its two bounding rays will shoot inside Pr . These two rays will hit two points of ∂P r and we let Iw denote the interval of ∂P r between the two hit points. The observation is that for any q ∈ ∂P r , q is visible to w

only if q ∈ Iw.Consider a point q ∈ ∂P r . Let Wq be the set of elements w of Pℓ whose intervals Iw

contain q. We sort the elements of Wq by their index order and store them in a binary search tree Tq . With Tq , in light of Observation 1, Vis (Pℓ, q ) consists of the elements of Tq clipped by the cone Cq (s), where s = Vis (d, q ). More specifically, let w1(q) and w2(q) be the two points of ∂P ℓ hit by the two bounding rays of Cq (s), respectively. Then, an element w of Tq

is visible to q if and only if w is between w1(q) and w2(q) in Tq . Hence, the portion of Tq

between w1(q) and w2(q) represents the combinatorial representation of Vis (Pℓ, q ).

Preprocessing. Based on the above discussion, we perform the following preprocessing work. We compute the interval Iw for all elements w ∈ Pℓ. This can be done in O(n log n)

time by first computing the cones Cw of all elements w ∈ ∂P ℓ in O(n) time [18] and then solving O(n) ray-shooting queries in O(n log n) time with the help of a ray-shooting data structure [9, 20]. We sort all interval endpoints on ∂P r , which together partition ∂P r into 

O(n) intervals, called basic intervals . Let I denote the set of all basic intervals. For each basic interval I ∈ I , Tq is the same for all q ∈ I. Hence, we can maintain a single tree TI for each I. In addition, for two adjacent intervals I and I′, TI and TI′ differ by at most one element. To save space, as in the quadratic-space solution of [2] described in Section 3.1, we use a persistent binary tree TI to store TI for all O(n) basic intervals in O(n)

space and O(n log n) time [14, 26]. In addition, we construct the GH data structure [17] and a ray-shooting data structure [9, 20] for P , which take O(n) time in total. This finishes our preprocessing. The total space is O(n) and the total preprocessing time is O(n log n).

Queries. Given a query point q ∈ ∂P r , we first find the interval I ∈ I that contains q in 

O(log n) time by binary search. With I, we can obtain the tree Tq using the persistent tree 

TI . Next, using the GH data structure, we compute the cone Cq (s) with s = Vis (d, q ) in 

O(log n) time. Then, using two ray-shooting queries for the two bounding rays of Cq (s), we compute w1(q) and w2(q) in O( log n). Finally, we conduct the clipping operation on Tq to obtain a tree representing Vis (q). The total query time is thus O(log n).In summary, we obtain the following result. 

▶ Lemma 20. Given a simple polygon P of n vertices and a diagonal d dividing P into two subpolygons Pℓ and Pr , a data structure of O(n) space can be constructed in O(n log n) time such that Vis (Pℓ, q ) can be computed in O(log n) time for any query point q ∈ ∂P r .34 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

# 7.2 The general problem 

We now consider the general problem of computing Vis (q) for any query point q ∈ ∂P . We present two solutions. In our first solution, we follow the algorithmic framework described in Section 3.3, applying Lemma 20, and obtain the following result (as already mentioned at the end of Section 3.1). 

▶ Theorem 21. Given a simple polygon P of n vertices, a data structure of O(n log n) space can be constructed in O(n log 2 n) time such that the visibility polygon Vis (q) can be computed in O(log 2 n) time for any query point q ∈ ∂P .

Our second data structure employs our new decomposition Ψ and follows the same framework as the method in Section 5, using the boundary-case diagonal-separated data structure in Lemma 20. We briefly discuss it below, highlighting the modifications relative to the algorithm in Section 5. 

A data structure for geodesic triangles. The method in Section 5 relies on Theorem 9, which in turn is built upon a data structure for geodesic triangles (i.e., Lemma 8). We therefore need to handle the boundary case of this problem. Since the query points are on 

∂P , we only need to consider the second subproblem in Lemma 8, that is, when q ∈ Pd for some diagonal d on the boundary of △.The second subproblem is solved in Section 4.1.2. We follow the notation there, except that now q is restricted to lie on ∂P ∩ Pd. We design a data structure for query points in the pockets of the diagonals on π, i.e., the side of △ containing d. Intuitively, since π is a concave chain, we extend the algorithm in Section 7.1 for the diagonal-separated problem to this concave-chain-separated problem, i.e., π now plays the role of the separating diagonal in the problem of Section 7.1. Specifically, let Pr denote the union of the pockets of the diagonals along π, and let 

Pℓ = P \ Pr . Define ∂P r = ∂P ∩ Pr , and define ∂P ℓ similarly. Note that ∂P r is a portion of 

∂P whose endpoints are those of π, so ∂P r forms a one-dimensional polygonal chain; the same holds for ∂P ℓ.For each element w (i.e., a vertex or an edge) of ∂P ℓ, we compute the portion of π visible to w, which is constrained by a cone Cπ (w). We can compute all such cones Cπ (w) for every element w of ∂P ℓ in O(n) time by constructing the shortest path trees from the two endpoints of π, following the same approach as the algorithm of Guibas and Lubiw [18] for computing visibility cones with respect to a single edge. Indeed, the same algorithm applies here because π is a concave chain. Using Cπ (w), we define an interval on ∂P r by the two points where the bounding rays of Cπ (w) hit ∂P r . The remainder of the algorithm proceeds as in Section 7.1. The data structure thus requires O(n) space and O(n log n) preprocessing time. Given a query point q ∈ ∂P r , suppose q lies in the pocket of a diagonal d on π. We compute the cone Cq (s) with s = Vis (d, q ) and obtain the tree Tq as defined earlier. We then use Cq (s) to clip Tq , yielding a binary tree representing Vis (Pℓ, q ), which is Vis (P \ Pd, q )

since π is a concave chain. The total query time is O(log n).The above constructs a data structure for π, i.e., for query points q in the pockets of diagonals along π. We also build the same data structures for the other two sides of △. All together, these require O(n) space and O(n log n) preprocessing time. Hence, for any query point q ∈ ∂P ∩ Pd for a diagonal d ∈ ∂△, Vis (P \ Pd, q ) can be computed in O(log n) time. Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 35 

The main data structure. We now use the above geodesic-triangle data structure to construct the data structure of Theorem 9 (following the method in Section 4.4) and obtain its boundary version. The query time remains the same, but the space becomes O(n log 3 n)

and the preprocessing time becomes O(n log 4 n). Indeed, by Lemma 14 and following the analysis in Section 4.4, the total space of the data structures in each level of Ψ is O(n log 2 n).Since Ψ has O( log n) levels, the total space of the full data structure is O(n log 3 n), and the preprocessing time gains an additional logarithmic factor. We now plug this boundary version of Theorem 9 into the method of Section 5. In addition, when constructing the data structure Dv with respect to the gate dv for each internal node v ∈ Ψb, we use Lemma 20 instead. The resulting recurrence for the space S(n)

is as follows: 

S(n) = ∑

> v∈B(Ψ)

S(|Pv |) + O(nr ),

which solves to O(n1+ ϵ) by setting r = nϵ. Similarly, the preprocessing time is also O(n1+ ϵ).Including the boundary version of Theorem 9, the total space and preprocessing time of the overall data structure are both O(n1+ ϵ), while the query time remains O(log n).In summary, we obtain the following result for the boundary case. 

▶ Theorem 22. Given a simple polygon P of n vertices, a data structure can be constructed in O(n1+ ϵ) space and preprocessing time, for any constant ϵ > 0, such that the visibility polygon Vis (q) can be computed in O(log n) time for any query point q ∈ ∂P .

Note that applying the approach from Section 6 would not yield a better result, since that method is effective only when the preprocessing of the diagonal-separated subproblem requires Ω( n2) complexity. 

The vertex case. Finally, if the query point q is a vertex of P , then Theorem 21 immediately yields the following result. 

▶ Corollary 23. Given a simple polygon P with n vertices, one can construct a data structure of O(n log 2 n) space in O(n log 2 n) time such that, for any query point q that is a vertex of 

P , the visibility polygon Vis (q) can be reported in O(|Vis (q)|) time. 

Proof. During preprocessing, we construct the data structure of Theorem 21 in O(n log n)

space and O(n log 2 n) time; let D denote this data structure. Let S be the set of vertices v of P for which kv ≤ log 2 n, where kv is the number of vertices of Vis (v). We can compute S in O(n log 2 n) time as follows. For each vertex v, we use 

D to compute a binary search tree representing Vis (v) in O( log 2 n) time by Theorem 21. We then traverse the tree and output vertices of Vis (v) until either the entire visibility polygon has been reported or more than log 2 n vertices have been produced. In the former case, we conclude that kv ≤ log 2 n and add v to S. In the latter case, v̸ ∈ S. Thus, determining whether a given vertex belongs to S takes O( log 2 n) time, and processing all vertices takes 

O(n log 2 n) time. For each vertex v ∈ S, we explicitly store Vis (v) in the data structure. Since each such visibility polygon has size O( log 2 n) and there are at most n vertices, this requires O(n log 2 n)

space and construction time in total. This completes the preprocessing, which uses O(n log 2 n) space and time. Now consider a query vertex q. If q ∈ S, then since Vis (q) is explicitly stored, it can be reported in O(|Vis (q)|) time. Otherwise, we know that |Vis (q)| = Ω( log 2 n), and we compute 36 Visibility Queries in Simple Polygons 

Vis (q) using D in O(log 2 n + |Vis (q)|) time by Theorem 21. Since |Vis (q)| = Ω( log 2 n), this is O(|Vis (q)|) time. ◀

References 

1 Pankaj K. Agarwal and Micha Sharir. Ray shooting amidst convex polygons in 2D. Journal of Algorithms , 21(3):508–519, 1996. doi:10.1006/jagm.1996.0056 .

2 Boris Aronov, Leonidas J. Guibas, Marek Teichmann, and Li Zhang. Visibility queries and maintenance in simple polygons. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 27(4):461–483, 2002. 

doi:10.1007/s00454-001-0089-9 .

3 Prosenjit Bose, Anna Lubiw, and J. Ian Munro. Efficient visibility queries in simple polygons. 

Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications , 23(3):313–335, 2002. doi:10.1016/ S0925-7721(01)00070-0 .

4 Mojtaba Nouri Bygi and Mohammad Ghodsi. Weak visibility queries in simple polygons. In 

Proceedings of the 23rd Canadian Conference on Computational Geometry (CCCG) , 2011. URL: https://www.cccg.ca/proceedings/2011/papers/paper95.pdf .

5 Timothy M. Chan and Da Wei Zheng. Simplex range searching revisited: How to shave logs in multi-level data structures. In Proceedings of the 34th Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 1493–1511, 2023. doi:10.1137/1.9781611977554.ch54 .

6 Bernard Chazelle. A theorem on polygon cutting with applications. In Proceedings of the 23rd Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (FOCS) , pages 339–349, 1982. 

doi:10.1109/SFCS.1982.58 .

7 Bernard Chazelle. Triangulating a simple polygon in linear time. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 6:485–524, 1991. doi:10.1007/BF02574703 .

8 Bernard Chazelle. Cutting hyperplanes for divide-and-conquer. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 9:145–158, 1993. doi:10.1007/BF02189314 .

9 Bernard Chazelle, Herbert Edelsbrunner, Michelangelo Grigni, Leonidas J. Guibas, John Hershberger, Micha Sharir, and Jack Snoeyink. Ray shooting in polygons using geodesic triangulations. Algorithmica , 12:54–68, 1994. doi:10.1007/BF01377183 .

10 Bernard Chazelle and Leonidas J. Guibas. Visibility and intersection problems in plane geometry. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 4:551–589, 1989. doi:10.1007/BF02187747 .

11 Danny Z. Chen and Ovidiu Daescu. Maintaining visibility of a polygon with a moving point of view. Information Processing Letters , 65:269–275, 1996. doi:10.1016/S0020-0190(97) 00211-1 .

12 Danny Z. Chen and Haitao Wang. Visibility and ray shooting queries in polygonal domains. 

Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications , 48:31–41, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.comgeo. 2014.08.003 .

13 Danny Z. Chen and Haitao Wang. Weak visibility queries of line segments in simple polygons. 

Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications , 48:443–452, 2015. doi:10.1016/j.comgeo. 2015.02.001 .

14 James R. Driscoll, Neil Sarnak, Daniel D. Sleator, and Robert E. Tarjan. Making data structures persistent. Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 38(1):86–124, 1989. doi: 10.1016/0022-0000(89)90034-2 .

15 Herbert Edelsbrunner, Leonidas J. Guibas, and Jorge Stolfi. Optimal point location in a monotone subdivision. SIAM Journal on Computing , 15(2):317–340, 1986. doi:10.1137/ 0215023 .

16 Hossam A. ElGindy and David Avis. A linear algorithm for computing the visibility polygon from a point. Journal of Algorithms , 2(2):186–197, 1981. doi:10.1016/0196-6774(81) 90019-5 .

17 Leonidas J. Guibas and John Hershberger. Optimal shortest path queries in a simple polygon. 

Journal of Computer and System Sciences , 39(2):126–152, 1989. doi:10.1016/0022-0000(89) 90041-X .Bhore, Liu, Naredla, Nekrich, Oh, van Renssen, Staals, Wang, and Xue 37 

18 Leonidas J. Guibas, John Hershberger, Daniel Leven, Micha Sharir, and Robert E. Tarjan. Linear-time algorithms for visibility and shortest path problems inside triangulated simple polygons. Algorithmica , 2(1-4):209–233, 1987. doi:10.1007/BF01840360 .

19 Leonidas J. Guibas, Rajeev Motwani, and Prabhakar Raghavan. The robot localization problem in two dimensions. In Proceedings of the 3rd Annual ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms (SODA) , pages 259–268, 1992. doi:10.5555/139404.139460 .

20 John Hershberger and Subhash Suri. A pedestrian approach to ray shooting: Shoot a ray, take a walk. Journal of Algorithms , 18:403–431, 1995. doi:10.1006/jagm.1995.1017 .

21 Rajasekhar Inkulu and Sanjiv Kapoor. Visibility queries in a polygonal region. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications , 42(9):852–864, 2009. doi:10.1016/j.comgeo.2009.02. 004 .

22 David G. Kirkpatrick. Optimal search in planar subdivisions. SIAM Journal on Computing ,12(1):28–35, 1983. doi:10.1137/0212002 .

23 Lin Lu, Chenglei Yang, and Jiaye Wang. Point visibility computing in polygons with holes. Journal of Information and Computational Science , 8(16):4165–4173, 2011. URL: https://www.researchgate.net/publication/282763094_Point_visibility_ computing_in_polygons_with_holes .

24 Ji˘ rí Matoušek. Efficient partition trees. Discrete and Computational Geometry , 8(3):315–334, 1992. doi:10.1007/BF02293051 .

25 Michel Pocchiola. Graphics in flatland revisited. In Proceedings of the 2nd Scandinavian Workshop on Algorithm Theory (SWAT) , pages 85–96, 1990. doi:10.1007/3-540-52846-6_80 .

26 Neil Snarnak and Robert E. Tarjan. Planar point location using persistent search trees. 

Communications of the ACM , 29:669–679, 1986. doi:10.1145/6138.6151 .

27 Alireza Zarei and Mohammad Ghodsi. Query point visibility computation in polygons with holes. Computational Geometry: Theory and Applications , 39(2):78–90, 2008. doi: 10.1016/j.comgeo.2007.02.005 .