Title: Multi-User XR Offloading via Massive MIMO: A System-Level Analysis using a Real-Life Dataset

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.02631v1

Published Time: Tue, 05 May 2026 02:07:33 GMT

Number of Pages: 5

Markdown Content:
# Multi-User XR Offloading via Massive MIMO: A System-Level Analysis using a Real-Life Dataset 

Love B´ ar´ any, Ilayda Yaman, Ove Edfors, Amir Aminifar, Liang Liu 

Dept. of Electrical and Information Technology, Lund University, Sweden 

Email: first.last@eit.lth.se 

Abstract —Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM) is one of the biggest bottlenecks of Extended Reality (XR) devices, which have strict requirements for latency, power consumption, and user satisfaction. A solution that has been proposed and studied to meet the requirements is to offload SLAM to a remote server, which leverages computational hardware but may suffer due to incurred delays and transmission power. In this work, we propose offloading SLAM using Massive MIMO, which is attractive due to lower latencies, transmission power, and amore reliable link for multiple users. A framework for system-level analysis of latency and localisation error in multi-user offloaded XR with Massive MIMO has been proposed, and a case study with varying system-level parameters has been performed with it. The case study showed that there are important trade-offs between latency, localisation error, and device transmission power. We find that Massive MIMO is a promising technology for XR offloading, but that further evaluations including complete device power consumption are needed to get the full picture. 

Index Terms —extended reality, wireless communication, signal processing, computational offloading, simultaneous localisation and mapping 

I. I NTRODUCTION 

Extended Reality (XR) devices contain computationally demanding blocks, but have strict constraints on latency, power consumption, and user satisfaction. One of the most demanding blocks in XR devices is vision-based Simultaneous Localisation and Mapping (SLAM), which can occupy more than half the available CPU time [1]. SLAM algorithms use sensor inputs, such as camera images, to jointly estimate the position of the sensor and a map of the world around it. A solution to meet the latency constraints, while keeping power consumption down, is to offload demanding compu-tations to a remote server with computational abilities. In previous offloaded SLAM evaluations, the offloaded portion has been placed on an edge or cloud server, and offloading is done through Wi-Fi or 5G links [2]–[6]. Some evaluate multi-user scenarios [6], while most evaluate a single-user scenario [2]–[5]. Furthermore, most only evaluate one partitioning of work between the device and the remote server [2]–[4], [6]. Although offloading can reduce latency and power by leveraging powerful hardware, it introduces further latency and power consumption due to wireless transmissions. If the link quality is poor and data is lost or corrupted, user satisfaction may be negatively affected. Additionally, traditional commu-nication schemes may not allow all users to transmit at all 

This research has been supported by the Swedish Foundation for Strategic Research (CSS22-0003) through the Chalmers-Lund Center for Advanced Semiconductor System Design (classIC). 

times using the full bandwidth, meaning users either have to wait or only use a subset of available frequencies. Massive MIMO is a mobile communication paradigm in which the number of antennas at the base station is much larger than the number of users that the antennas serve. Users can transmit data simultaneously at all times, using the full bandwidth, via spatial multiplexing. The Massive MIMO communication link is also more reliable due to channel hardening [7]. Furthermore, increasing the number of antennas increases the antenna gain, which can reduce the required transmission power on devices [8]. Thereby, we propose to leverage Massive MIMO for multi-user XR offloading, as well as to utilise hardware at the base station for the offloaded computations, which would avoid further routing. To assess the fit of Massive MIMO with XR offloading, it must be determined whether latency constraints are met, whether the link quality is good enough for offloading, and what the impact on device power consumption is. For power, we will only consider the transmission power required on XR devices. In order to accurately evaluate offloading with Massive MIMO, we use a real-life dataset that contains synchronised images, wireless measurements, and ground truth trajectories to evaluate SLAM accuracy: the Lund University Vision, Radio, and Audio (LuViRA) dataset [9]. Our main contribution in this paper is a framework for system-level analysis of multi-user offloaded XR with Massive MIMO. This framework is then used in an exploratory study to evaluate the trade-offs between latency, localisation error, and device transmission power for three offloaded scenarios with varying wireless frame structures and Bit Error Rates (BERs). II. B ACKGROUND AND SYSTEM OVERVIEW 

In XR devices, an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) and pose predictor provide fast pose estimates to meet display latency requirements. IMU estimates are known to drift over time, which SLAM corrects. If the SLAM correction takes too long, drift will build up, and user satisfaction will be negatively affected due to inaccurate pose estimates. User studies indicate that user satisfaction is maintained if the latency of pose correction is below 200ms , with some allowed variability [2]. Figure 1 shows the overall function blocks for offloaded vision SLAM using massive MIMO, with the XR device model 

a , the LuViRA dataset measurement setup b , and the Massive MIMO base station model c .Measurements in the LuViRA dataset were taken in an area of size 4.2 × 2.5m2. The base station used is the Lund  

> arXiv:2605.02631v1 [eess.SP] 4 May 2026 Fig. 1. Overall offloaded XR diagram. Vision SLAM components are simplified for illustrative purposes, and are only an example of the specific tasks and partitioning between device and offloaded.

University Massive MIMO (LuMaMI) testbed [10], which implements fully digital beamforming with 100 antennas and 1200 subcarriers. Transmissions occur at a central frequency of 3.7GHz, with a bandwidth of 20MHz. The user equipment is equipped with an Intel RealSense D435i depth camera providing colour and depth images, an IMU for inertial sensor data, and an antenna for wireless channel state information. The ground-truth system uses motion capture cameras to measure the true trajectory of the user equipment, with a sub-millimetre accuracy [9]. In order to simulate a multi-user scenario, we concatenate massive MIMO channel matrices of 10 trajectories to mimic a scenario where 10 users are offloading simultaneously, all using the full 20MHz bandwidth. This concatenated matrix is then used to simulate BER for all 10 users, in terms of the post-equalisation Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR) received at the base station per user. The multi-user aspect of this work is captured through this realistic channel model. It is assumed that all XR devices transmit with power control—the devices dynamically adjust their transmission power so that the SNR received at the base station is the same for all users, regardless of their distance from it. As shown in Figure 1, vision SLAM is divided into vision SLAM device d and vision SLAM offloaded e . The exact task division between the device and the base station differs depending on the offloading scenario. The tasks in the vision SLAM blocks are based on the RGB-Depth (RGB-D) pipeline of ORB-SLAM3 [11]. First, features are extracted from the greyscale image. The features are then assigned a relative depth from the camera, using the depth image, to create 3D coordinates. The extracted features are matched with features found in previous images, and the matches are used to estimate the pose in pose optimisation. The estimated pose and features are then further optimised with bundle adjustment, to improve the consistency of the estimated trajectory and enabling more accurate future estimations. In our exploratory study, we will assume that both SLAM device and offloaded are computed in the physical layer, without packeting beyond mapping to OFDM symbols and without error correction. While error correction ensures that user satisfaction does not suffer, it introduces latency to detect and correct the errors, with a similar trade-off for more packeting. A real system would most likely contain some form of the two; however, we wish to evaluate how sensitive the SLAM accuracy is to raw bit errors. The results of this sensitivity study can then be used to guide the amount of error correction needed. III. A NALYSIS FRAMEWORK 

To evaluate the system, we developed an analysis framework for evaluating pose correction latency and the sensitivity of SLAM accuracy to bit errors in terms of localisation error. The framework focuses on SLAM execution and massive MIMO communication during offloading. It combines real-world implementation and measurement results with analytical models, making the framework both realistic and flexible for exploring design trade-offs. 

A. Latency model 

We define the pose correction latency as the time between images being input to a pose being computed and transmitted back to the device, and model it as: 

τpose = τdevice + τUL + τBS + τoffloaded + τDL . (1) 

τdevice and τoffloaded are, respectively, the execution times of the SLAM algorithm on the device and the offloading base station. Their sum is the total latency of the SLAM task. τUL 

and τDL are the latencies for transmitting the offloaded data to Fig. 2. Frame structures compared: A (top) and B (bottom). 1200 subcarriers with 64-QAM modulation is assumed. Pilot symbols are used to estimate the channel at the base station. 

and from the base station in terms of the radio frame structure, respectively. τBS is the processing latency of the RF front-ends and digital baseband on the base station. The latency model is a hybrid model in that τdevice , τoffloaded ,and τBS come from experimental results, while τUL and τDL 

are model-based. For τBS , we use an FPGA implementation result from the LuMaMI testbed that τBS = 132 μs [12]. For 

τdevice and τoffloaded , we use experimental results from executing ORB-SLAM3 on an embedded device and a high-end desktop computer, respectively. A modified ORB-SLAM3 package is used, which records the time when images are input, when offloading occurs, and when a pose is returned. We express the transmission times as: 

τUL =τsymb · (Nsymb wait UL + Nsymb/pose UL +

Nslot/pose UL · (Nsymb − NUL symb )) , (2) for uplink, replacing UL with DL where appropriate for downlink. A radio frame is organised into a number of slots, with each slot containing Nsymb OFDM symbols. Of these, 

NUL symb are uplink data symbols and NDL symb are downlink data symbols. Each OFDM symbol is τsymb = 71 .4μs long in the LuMaMi testbed. Nsymb/pose [UL;DL] and Nslot/pose [UL;DL] 

are, respectively, the number of OFDM symbols and full slots needed to transmit the offloaded data. Nsymb wait [UL;DL] is the number of symbols to wait before transmission can start in the worst case, defined as in [13]. In the offloading scenarios we study, there is an imbalance in the amount of data transmitted between uplink and downlink: uplink consists of sensor inputs at various stages of processing, while downlink consists of computed poses. As such, we would like to investigate the impact of different radio frame structures on the pose correction latency. As a case study, we select the two structures shown in Figure 2. Frame structure A balances uplink and downlink traffic, while frame structure B is optimised for an uplink-heavy scenario. All users transmit using all OFDM data symbols and subcarriers simultaneously. Since we perform an exploratory study, we make a few assumptions for simplicity. We assume that the latencies of the RF front-end, converter, and baseband processing on the device are negligible compared to other latencies in the model. Since the scenario considered is indoors, signal propagation latency is also assumed to be negligible. Finally, we assume that there are enough resources to serve all communication with all users without queueing or other incurred delays. 

B. Localisation error model 

In order to quantitatively evaluate the resulting trajectories generated by the SLAM block, Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) as described in [14] can be used. In this work, only the translation component of ATE is evaluated, which we refer to as the localisation error. We use evo [15] to align the estimated trajectories with the corresponding ground truths using all poses in the estimated trajectories, to re-scale, and to compute the localisation error. As shown in [9], the base-line localisation error of the trajectories varies. If errors are averaged and compared directly, the average may be biased towards trajectories with larger baseline errors. Furthermore, the change in error with offloading is of greater relevance than the errors themselves. Therefore, results are normalised by computing the percentage error difference relative to a no-offloading baseline. Errors are first normalised and averaged per trajectory, then averaged over all trajectories. To quantify the sensitivity of SLAM accuracy to bit errors, we simulate bit errors that would occur during wireless trans-mission, without error correction. Due to the large number of antennas in Massive MIMO, we assume that bit errors are uniformly distributed rather than appearing in bursts. For data that would be offloaded, the number of bit errors that occur is sampled from a binomial distribution with an uncoded BER as probability of success. Bit error locations are then sampled uniformly without replacement. Offloaded data that becomes invalid after bit errors is restricted to known allowed ranges, so that the SLAM algorithm does not crash. IV. R ESULTS AND DISCUSSION 

We will now use the framework to explore the trade-offs between latency, localisation error, and device transmission power, for 3 offloading scenarios, 2 wireless frame structures, and 4 BERs. The embedded device is a Jetson Orin Nano 8GB with 2 active CPU cores, configured for minimal power consumption. The desktop computer contains an Intel(R) Core i7-2600K CPU and a discrete GeForce GTX 1080 Ti GPU. 

A. Offloading scenarios compared 

We wish to study the effect of transmitting inputs at various stages of processing. A more processed input will take less time to be transmitted because it is smaller, but may be more sensitive to bit errors. The data transmitted and the packet size for the three scenarios considered are given in Table I. We can see that there is an imbalance between uplink and downlink traffic, which motivates the comparison of frame structures. The scenarios differ in task division between the device and the base station. In all scenarios, pose optimisation and bundle adjustment are performed on the base station. In the first scenario, the device does minimal processing. In the second scenario, the device extracts features from the greyscale image. In the third scenario, the device extracts features and assigns a depth value to each. The partitioning in Figure 1 corresponds to the second scenario. TABLE I SUMMARY OF OFFLOADING SCENARIOS , WITH TYPE OF DATA TRANSMITTED AND PACKET SIZES , FOR UPLINK AND DOWNLINK .Uplink Downlink                         

> Scenario Transmitted Packet size (KiB) Transmitted Packet size (KiB)
> 1Greyscale & depth images 900 Pose 0.04 2Features & depth image 672 Pose 0.04 3Features with depths 84 Pose 0.04 Frame structure A Frame structure B Baseline 123Baseline 1230100 200 300 400

Scenario Pose correction latency (ms) device uplink offl oaded downlink    

> Fig. 3. Average pose correction latency by term in (1) across all trajectories, by scenario and frame structure. τBS not visualized due to being small compared to other terms. Error bars indicate standard deviation, while crosses represent the worst case latency.

B. Pose correction latency results 

Figure 3 shows pose correction latency by scenario and frame structure. We can see that the pose correction deadline of 200ms is met on average in almost all combinations, but never in the worst cases. The dominant terms in (1) seem to be 

τdevice and τUL , with some variation depending on the scenario. An important observation is that τdevice more than doubles when features are extracted on the device in scenarios 2 and 3, compared to scenario 1. As such, we could reduce the overall latency for these scenarios by accelerating feature extraction on the device. As an example, an accelerator implementing feature extraction could extract 1000 features in 7.1ms [16]. Although using frame structure B reduces τUL somewhat, it may not be the best solution for this. Since it is unlikely that the only transmissions that occur are related to SLAM, other applications with more downlink traffic may be throttled if frame structure B is used. Instead, some type of compression or fitting more bits into each data symbol may be a better solution. 

C. Localisation error results 

Localisation error results are presented in Figure 4. Even if all scenarios follow a trend of increased error with increased Scenario 1 Scenario 2 Scenario 3 1e-06 1e-05 1e-04 1e-03 1e-06 1e-05 1e-04 1e-03 1e-06 1e-05 1e-04 1e-03 050 100 BER Normalised localisation error (%)    

> Fig. 4. Normalised localisation error versus BER by scenario. Bootstrap mean (points) with 95% confidence interval (ribbon) and bootstrap standard deviation (error bars), 10000 draws.

BER, there is a difference in magnitude and spread. For scenario 2, a BER of 10 −4 exhibits lower normalized errors than the other two scenarios, that need a BER of 10 −5 to match it. Scenario 2 has the lowest error and the smallest spread for most BERs, indicating that it is the most robust scenario of the three in the presence of random bit flips. This should be studied further, as it is not obvious why features and the depth image are less affected by bit errors compared to the greyscale image and processed depths. To decrease the BER, we could increase the SNR, which we discuss in the next section. Another possibility is to reduce the number of bits per symbol, but this would lead to an increase in latency. 

D. Impact on device transmission power 

From these results, we wish to estimate the required device transmission power. Initially, we perform system BER sim-ulations to find the required post-equalisation SNR per user for a given BER, shown in Figure 5. We consider an indoor factory scenario, with a distance between a device and the base station of 100m . We assume thermal noise at 300 K , a fading margin of 2.5dB , and a receiver noise figure of 8dB .For simplicity, we assume free-space path loss, but a more careful analysis for more specific environments can be made. The central frequency and bandwidth come from the LuMaMI testbed. Using a first-order link budget, we estimate that the transmission power required for an uncoded BER of 10 −4

and 10 −5 is 0.856mW and 1.356mW , respectively. These powers are low, not only because of the number of antennas in Massive MIMO, but also because we only consider very short distances. With these first-order estimates, we can see a significant relative difference. However, the actual difference is small and may not be significant compared to the power consumed by other components. Note that these are powers required at the output of a power amplifier; the actual power consumption will depend on the efficiency of the amplifier. 1e-06 1e-05 1e-04 1e-03 1e-02 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 Post-equalisation SNR (dB) Uncoded BER Fig. 5. Average uncoded BER of Massive MIMO channel with 10 users versus post-equalisation SNR. Received signals are equalised with zero-forcing. 

E. Trade-offs 

There are quite a few trade-offs that become apparent when considering the combination of all results. If our goal is to decrease the device processing, and thus the device latency, the system becomes more sensitive to bit errors, and the transmission time increases. In order not to increase the error significantly, a lower BER is needed, which requires a higher SNR. A higher SNR requires more transmission power. If we reduce the transmission time by compressing the data, latency for compression will be introduced. Feature extraction and depth association can be considered forms of compression, and as previously seen, the latency more than doubles when performing this compression compared to transmitting raw images. If we instead increase the amount of data per data symbol, intersymbol interference will increase, leading to higher SNR requirements to achieve the same BER. If our goal instead is to minimise errors introduced by offloading, we need to have more transmission power, or do more processing on the device. The overall latency is similar or lower than a no-offloading baseline in these cases, but the device processing latency is not much lower than in the baseline. This may imply that power consumption is not reduced. However, we should note that bundle adjustment, which is the most computationally intensive process in ORB-SLAM3, is moved to the base station in all scenarios, and does not have a direct impact on pose correction latency. Therefore, any conclusion regarding device power consumption cannot be made without a more thorough evaluation. With our assumptions, scenario 2 provides the best latency-robustness trade-offs, while scenario 1 minimizes device la-tency, and scenario 3 minimizes network traffic. V. C ONCLUSIONS 

We have proposed a framework for exploring latency, lo-calisation error, and device transmission power trade-offs in multi-user offloaded XR with Massive MIMO. We set up three task division scenarios and identified the trade-offs for different configurations of scenario, frame structure, and BER. We also compared the offloaded scenarios with a baseline without offloading. Our work has shown Massive MIMO to be promising as an enabler of offloaded multi-user XR, with further studies needed. In this work, the multi-user aspect was captured through the realistic channel, but other effects such as scheduling should be evaluated. Future work will focus on a more detailed device power consumption model, as well as base station hardware architectures to support both mobile communication tasks and offloaded XR computations. REFERENCES [1] M. Huzaifa, R. Desai, S. Grayson, X. Jiang, Y. Jing, J. Lee, F. Lu, Y. Pang, J. Ravichandran, F. Sinclair, B. Tian, H. Yuan, J. Zhang, and S. V. Adve, “ILLIXR: An Open Testbed to Enable Extended Reality Systems Research,” IEEE Micro , vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 97–106, Jul. 2022. [2] Q. Jiang, Y. Pang, W. Sentosa, S. Gao, M. Huzaifa, J. Zhang, J. Perez-Ramirez, D. Das, D. Gonzalez-Aguirre, B. Godfrey, and S. Adve, “RemoteVIO: Offloading Head Tracking in an End-to-End XR System,” in Proceedings of the 16th ACM Multimedia Systems Conference , ser. MMSys ’25. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, Mar. 2025, pp. 101–112. [3] A. J. Ben Ali, M. Kouroshli, S. Semenova, Z. S. Hashemifar, S. Y. Ko, and K. Dantu, “Edge-SLAM: Edge-Assisted Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping,” ACM Trans. Embed. Comput. Syst. , vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 18:1–18:31, Oct. 2022. [4] Y. Zhang, Y. Mao, H. Wang, Z. Yu, S. Guo, J. Zhang, L. Wang, and B. Guo, “Orchestrating Joint Offloading and Scheduling for Low-Latency Edge SLAM,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing ,vol. 24, no. 8, pp. 6901–6917, Aug. 2025. [5] P. Sossalla, J. Hofer, J. Rischke, C. Vielhaus, G. T. Nguyen, M. Reisslein, and F. H. P. Fitzek, “DynNetSLAM: Dynamic Visual SLAM Network Offloading,” IEEE Access , vol. 10, pp. 116 014–116 030, 2022. [6] X. Pan, G. Huang, Z. Zhang, J. Li, H. Bao, and G. Zhang, “Robust Collaborative Visual-Inertial SLAM for Mobile Augmented Reality,” 

IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics , vol. 30, no. 11, pp. 7354–7363, Nov. 2024. [7] T. L. Marzetta, “Noncooperative Cellular Wireless with Unlimited Numbers of Base Station Antennas,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications , vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 3590–3600, Nov. 2010. [8] H. Q. Ngo, E. G. Larsson, and T. L. Marzetta, “Energy and Spectral Efficiency of Very Large Multiuser MIMO Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Communications , vol. 61, no. 4, pp. 1436–1449, Apr. 2013. [9] I. Yaman, G. Tian, E. Tegler, J. Gulin, N. Challa, F. Tufvesson, O. Edfors, K. ˚ Astr¨ om, S. Malkowsky, and L. Liu, “LuViRA Dataset Validation and Discussion: Comparing Vision, Radio, and Audio Sensors for Indoor Localization,” IEEE Journal of Indoor and Seamless Positioning and Navigation , vol. 2, pp. 240–250, 2024. [10] S. Malkowsky, J. Vieira, L. Liu, P. Harris, K. Nieman, N. Kundargi, I. C. Wong, F. Tufvesson, V. ¨ Owall, and O. Edfors, “The World’s First Real-Time Testbed for Massive MIMO: Design, Implementation, and Validation,” IEEE Access , vol. 5, pp. 9073–9088, 2017. [11] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr´ ıguez, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tard´ os, “ORB-SLAM3: An Accurate Open-Source Library for Visual, Visual-Inertial and Multi-Map SLAM,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics ,vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1874–1890, Dec. 2021. [12] S. Malkowsky, J. Vieira, K. Nieman, N. Kundargi, I. Wong, V. ¨ Owall, O. Edfors, F. Tufvesson, and L. Liu, “Implementation of Low-Latency Signal Processing and Data Shuffling for TDD Massive MIMO Sys-tems,” in 2016 IEEE International Workshop on Signal Processing Systems (SiPS) , Oct. 2016, pp. 260–265. [13] L. Tinnerberg, D. Iancu, O. Edfors, L. Liu, and J. V. Alegr´ ıa, “Spectrum efficiency and processing latency trade-offs in panel-based lis,” 2025. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2411.19147 [14] Z. Zhang and D. Scaramuzza, “A Tutorial on Quantitative Trajectory Evaluation for Visual(-Inertial) Odometry,” in 2018 IEEE/RSJ Interna-tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) , Oct. 2018, pp. 7244–7251. [15] M. Grupp, “evo: Python package for the evaluation of odometry and slam.” https://github.com/MichaelGrupp/evo, 2017. [16] L. Ferreira, S. Malkowsky, P. Persson, S. Karlsson, K. ˚Astr¨ om, and L. Liu, “Energy-Efficient Application-Specific Instruction-Set Processor for Feature Extraction in Smart Vision Systems,” in 2021 55th Asilomar Conference on Signals, Systems, and Computers , Oct. 2021, pp. 324– 328.